BEDFORD INTEGRATED MEDIA

+

You and your students have access
to LearningCurve!

Assign LearningCurve and watch your class excel. LearningCurve ensures
your students do the reading and offers you reports on how well your class and
individual students understand the topics. With LearningCurve, your students come
to class better prepared, and you can adjust class time to focus on difficult material
and help students achieve greater success.

How it works.  LearningCurve is a game-like adaptive learning tool informed by
research in psychology. LearningCurve promotes retrieval practice through its unique
delivery of questions and point system. Students with a firm grasp of the material
get plenty of practice but proceed through the activity relatively quickly. Unprepared
students are given more questions so they can learn from answer feedback
and practice more. Because the activities can be assigned in weekly intervals,
LearningCurve helps students retain the information far better than last-minute
cramming.

To learn more about how LearningCurve works and watch a demo, visit
bedfordstmartins.com/learningcurve.

“By requiring LearningCurve, I know that students have reviewed the
material before class, which makes for more lively discussion.”

 — Beth Kontos, North Shore Community College

Teachers: For instructor access, visit bedfordstmartins.com/highschool
/henretta8e and register as an instructor.

For technical support, visit macmillanhighered.com/techsupport.

Redesigning your course doesn’t mean

redesigning your life. We can help.

TEACHER MATERIALS for the redesigned AP® course.

This Annotated Teacher’s Edition was developed by a team of dedicated and

experienced teachers, readers, and workshop leaders: Matthew J. Ellington of Ruben

S. Ayala Senior High School, Jason George of The Bryn Mawr School, and George

W. Henry, Jr. of East High School. This resource includes model answers, teaching

tips, Historical Thinking Skills practice, pacing guides, and more.

Computerized Test Bank including multiple-choice, short-answer, and essay

questions for each chapter. It also contains brand new source-based multiple-choice

questions and part-wide essay questions.

Teacher’s Resource Guide with information on the new AP U.S. History test format

and grading standards, correlation guides that align AP U.S. History themes and

key concepts with the textbook, advice on building a syllabus for AP U.S. History,

and AP-focused chapter-specific resources.

The Bedford Lecture Kit Instructor’s Resource CD-ROM with ready-made and

fully customizable PowerPoint presentations that include lecture outlines and maps

and selected images in JPEG and PowerPoint formats.

Teacher’s Survival Guide: For the New AP® U.S. History Course featuring

a complete AP-format test bank with hundreds of questions and complete DBQs,

as well as a roundtable discussion among expert AP teachers on teaching the new

course.

Teaching Ideas for AP® History: A Video Resource with key insights and

support from veteran AP teachers and college instructors on varied topics – from

creating a syllabus to developing historical thinking skills.

STUDENT MATERIALS for the redesigned AP® course.

Sources for America’s History designed to complement the textbook; this reader

includes over 225 primary-source documents as well as unique part sets aligned to

the new AP periodization that support AP thematic learning objectives.

Strive for a 5: Preparing for the AP® U.S. History Examination has been

completely revised for the new course with two full-length practice exams by Warren

Hierl of Career Center in Winston-Salem, NC; Louisa Moffitt of the Marist School,

Atlanta, GA; and Nancy Schick of Los Alamos High School, NM; all experienced AP

teachers, exam readers, and workshop leaders.

For more information about these and other resources, visit highschool.bfwpub

.com/henretta8e.

AP® is a trademark registered by the College Board, which was not involved in the production of, and does not

endorse, this product.

mech-Henretta_AmHist8e_ATE-121013.indd   ONLINE ONLY

