For Bedford/St. Martin’s
Publisher for History: Mary V. Dougherty
Executive Editor for History: William J. Lombardo, Daniel McDonough
Director of Development for History: Jane Knetzger
Senior Developmental Editor: Laura Arcari
Production Editor: Annette Pagliaro Sweeney
Senior Production Supervisor: Jennifer Peterson
Senior Marketing Manager: Janie Pierce-Bratcher
Associate Editor: Robin Soule
Editorial Assistant: Victoria Royal
Copyeditor: Susan Zorn
Indexer: Leoni Z. McVey, McVey & Associates, Inc.
Cartography: Mapping Specialists, Ltd.
Photo Researchers: Pembroke Herbert and Sandi Rygiel, Picture Research Consultants, Inc.
Senior Art Director: Anna Palchik
Text Designer: Maureen McCutcheon
Cover Designer: Marine Miller
Cover Art: Thomas Hart Benton, The Sources of Country Music, courtesy of Country Music Hall of Fame® and Museum
Composition: Jouve
Printing and Binding: RR Donnelley and Sons

President, Bedford/St. Martin’s: Denise B. Wydra
Director of Marketing: Karen R. Soeltz
Production Director: Susan W. Brown
Director of Rights and Permissions: Hilary Newman

Copyright © 2014, 2011, 2008, 2004 by Bedford/St. Martin’s
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except as may be expressly permitted by the
applicable copyright statutes or in writing by the Publisher.

Manufactured in the United States of America.
  19  18  17  16  15
5  6  7  8  9  10

For information, write: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 75 Arlington Street, Boston, MA 02116

(617-399-4000)

ISBN: 978–1–4576–7382–5
ISBN: 978–1–4576–2893–1 (with Bedford Integrated Media)

AP® is a trademark registered by the College Board, which was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse,
this product.

