Preface
Why This Book This Way

The new College Board standards for AP U.S. History
present exciting opportunities and big challenges. As the
authors  of  America’s  History,  we  have  closely  followed
College Board changes by attending and participating in
numerous AP workshops, webinars for teachers, and the
AP Annual Conference. We  believe the new exam, with
its focus on themes and Historical Thinking Skills, rep-
resents  a  positive  direction.  But  we  know  it  means
major changes for you, so we’re here to help.

The AP U.S. History classroom presents a unique
dilemma. How do we offer our students a basic under-
standing of key events and facts while inviting them to
see the past not as a rote list of names and dates but as
the fascinating, conflicted prelude to their lives today?
How do we teach our students to think like historians?
As  scholars  and  teachers  who  go  into  the  classroom
every  day,  we  know  these  challenges  well  and  have
composed  the  eighth  edition  of  America’s  History  to
help instructors meet them. America’s History has long
had a reputation in the AP community for its balanced
coverage,  attention  to  AP  themes  and  content,  and
ability to explain to students not just what happened,
but why. The latest edition both preserves and substan-
tially builds upon those strengths.

The  foundation  of  our  approach  lies  in  our  com-
mitment  to  an  integrated  history.  America’s  History
combines traditional “top down” narratives of political
and  economic  affairs  with  “bottom  up”  narratives  of
the lived experiences of ordinary people. Our goal is to
help students achieve a richer understanding of politics,
diplomacy,  war,  economics,  intellectual  and  cultural
life, and gender, class, and race relations by exploring
how  developments  in  all  these  areas  were  intercon-
nected. Our analysis is fueled by a passion for exploring
big, consequential questions. How did a colonial slave
society settled by people from four continents become
a pluralist democracy? How have liberty and equality
informed  the  American  experience?  Questions  like
these  help  students  understand  what’s  at  stake  as  we
study the past. In America’s History, we provide an inte-
grated  historical  approach  and  bring  a  dedication  to
why history matters to bear on the full sweep of Amer-
ica’s past.

One of the most exciting developments in this edi-
tion is the arrival of a new author, Eric Hinderaker. An

expert in native and early American history, Eric brings
a fresh interpretation of native and colonial European
societies  and  the  revolutionary  Atlantic  World  of  the
eighteenth century that enlivens and enriches our nar-
rative. Eric joins James Henretta, long the intellectual
anchor of the book, whose scholarly work now focuses
on  law,  citizenship,  and  the  state  in  early  America;
Rebecca  Edwards,  an  expert  in  women’s  and  gender
history and nineteenth-century electoral politics; and
Robert  Self,  whose  work  explores  the  relationship
between  urban  and  suburban  politics,  social  move-
ments, and the state. Together, we strive to ensure that
energy and creativity, as well as our wide experience in
the study of history, infuse every page that follows.

The core of a textbook is its narrative, and we have
endeavored to make ours clear, accessible, and lively. In
it,  we  focus  not  only  on  the  marvelous  diversity  of
peoples  who  came  to  call  themselves  Americans,  but
also  on  the  institutions  that  have  forged  a  common
national identity. More than ever, we daily confront the
collision  of  our  past  with  the  demands  of  the  future
and  the  shrinking  distance  between  Americans  and
others around the globe. To help students meet these
challenges,  we  call  attention  to  connections  with  the
histories  of  Canada,  Latin  America,  Europe,  Africa,
and Asia, drawing links between events in the United
States and those elsewhere. In our contemporary digi-
tal world, facts and data are everywhere. What students
crave is analysis. As it has since its inception, America’s
History provides students with a comprehensive expla-
nation and interpretation of events, a guide to why his-
tory unfolded as it did and a roadmap for understanding
the world in which we live.

Of course, the contents of this book are only helpful
if  students  read  and  assimilate  the  material  before
coming to class. So that students will come to class pre-
pared, they now receive access to LearningCurve —  an
adaptive, gamelike online learning tool that helps them
master  content —  when  they  purchase  a  new  copy  of
America’s  History.  And  because  we  know  that  your
classroom needs are changing rapidly, we are excited to
announce  that  America’s  History  is  available  with
LaunchPad, a new robust interactive e-book built into
its  own  course  space  that  makes  customizing  and
assigning the book and its resources easy and efficient.

vii

