viii

(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:39)(cid:34)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:27)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:41)(cid:58)(cid:1)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:35)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:44)(cid:1)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:34)(cid:58)

To learn more about the benefits of LearningCurve and
LaunchPad,  see  the  “Versions  and  Supplements”  sec-
tion on page xii.

A Nine-Part Framework
Highlights Key Developments
One of the greatest strengths of America’s History is its
part  structure,  which  helps  students  identify  the  key
forces and major developments that shaped each era. A
four-page  part  opener  introduces  each  part,  using
analysis,  striking  images,  and  a  detailed  thematic
timeline to orient students to the major developments
and  themes  of  the  period  covered.  New  Thematic
Understanding  questions  ask  students  to  consider
periodization  and  make  connections  among  chapters
while  reinforcing  AP  themes  and  Thematic  Learning
Objectives. By organizing U.S. history into nine distinct
periods, rather than just thirty-one successive chapters,
we encourage students to trace changes and continu-
ities over time and to grasp connections between politi-
cal, economic, social, and cultural events.

In  this  edition,  we  have  closely  aligned  the  book’s
part structure to the redesigned AP U.S. History course
to make the transition to the new exam seamless. From
beginning to end, you’ll find that our nine-part organi-
zation corresponds to the College Board’s nine periods.
To  help  your  students  prepare  for  the  new  exam’s
expanded  attention  to  Native  Americans,  precontact
native societies and European colonization are now cov-
ered in two distinct parts, allowing us to devote compre-
hensive attention to the whole of North America before
the  1760s.  In the  modern period,  our final  two parts
offer expanded coverage of the period after 1945, mir-
roring the AP exam’s increased attention to the recent
past. Throughout, our part introductions give students
the tools to understand why the periodization looks the
way it does, helping them build the Historical Thinking
Skills the course demands. The nine parts organize the
complex history of North America and the United States
into  comprehensible  sections  with  distinct  themes,  a
structure that provides instructors with the crucial his-
torical  backbone  while  allowing  them  the  freedom  to
adapt specific examples from their classroom.

Part  1,  “Transformations  of  North  America,
1450–1700,” highlights the diversity and complexity of
Native Americans prior to European contact, examines
the transformative impact of European intrusions and
the Columbian Exchange, and emphasizes the experi-
mental  quality  of  colonial  ventures.  Part  2,  “British

North America and the Atlantic World, 1660–1763,”
explains  the  diversification  of  British  North  America
and the rise of the British Atlantic World and empha-
sizes the importance of contact between colonists and
Native Americans and imperial rivalries among Euro-
pean  powers.  Part  3,  “Revolution  and  Republican
Culture, 1763–1820,” traces the rise of colonial protest
against British imperial reform, outlines the ways that
the American Revolution challenged the social order,
and  explores  the  processes  of  conquest,  competition,
and consolidation that followed it.

Part  4,  “Overlapping  Revolutions,  1800–1860,”
traces the transformation of the economy, society, and
culture of the new nation; the creation of a democratic
polity; and growing sectional divisions. Part 5, “Cre-
ating  and  Preserving  a  Continental  Nation,  1844–
1877,”  covers  the  conflicts  generated  by  America’s
empire building in the West, including sectional politi-
cal struggles that led to the Civil War and national con-
solidation  of  power  during  and  after  Reconstruction.
Part  6,  “Industrializing  America:  Upheavals  and
Experiments, 1877–1917,” examines the transforma-
tions brought about by the rise of corporations and a
powerhouse  industrial  economy;  immigration  and  a
diverse,  urbanizing  society;  and  movements  for  pro-
gressive reform.

Part 7, “Domestic and Global Challenges, 1890–
1945,” explores America’s rise to world power, the cul-
tural  transformations  and  political  conflicts  of  the
1920s,  the  Great  Depression,  and  the  creation  of  the
welfare state. Part 8, “The Modern State and the Age
of  Liberalism,  1945–1980,”  addresses  the  postwar
period, including America’s new global leadership role
during the Cold War; the expansion of federal respon-
sibility during a new “age of liberalism”; and the growth
of  mass  consumption  and  the  middle  class.  Finally,
Part 9, “Global Capitalism and the End of the Amer-
ican Century, 1980 to the Present,” discusses the con-
servative political ascendancy of the 1980s; the end of
the  Cold  War  and  rising  conflict  in  the  Middle  East;
and globalization and increasing social inequality.

Hundreds of Sources
Encourage Comparative and
Critical Thinking
America’s History has long emphasized primary sources.
In  addition  to  weaving  lively  quotations  throughout
the  narrative,  we  offer  students  substantial  excerpts

