PREFACE: WHY THIS BOOK THIS WAY

ix

from historical documents —  letters, diaries, autobiog-
raphies, public testimony, and more —  and numerous
figures that give students practice working with data.
These documents allow students to experience the past
through the words and perspectives of those who lived
it, to understand how historians make sense of the past
using data, and to gain skill in interpreting historical
evidence.  Each  chapter  contains  three  source-based
features  that  prepare  students  for  the  rigor  of  the
Document-Based Question (DBQ).

American Voices, a two-page feature in each chap-
ter,  helps  students  learn  to  think  critically  by  com-
paring  texts  written  from  two  or  more  perspectives.
New  topics  include  “The  Debate  over  Free  and  Slave
Labor,”  “Jewish  Immigrants  in  the  Industrial  Econ-
omy,”  “Theodore  Roosevelt:  From  Anti-Populist  to
New  Nationalist,”  and  “Immigration  After  1965:  Its
Defenders and Critics.”

New  America  Compared  features  use  primary
sources and data to situate U.S. history in a global con-
text while giving students practice in comparison and
data analysis. Retooled from the Voices from Abroad
feature from the last edition to include data in addition
to  primary  sources,  these  features  appear  in  every
chapter  on  topics  as  diverse  as  the  fight  for  women’s
rights in France and the United States, an examination
of labor laws after emancipation in Haiti and the United
States, the loss of human life in World War I, and an
analysis  of  the  worldwide  economic  malaise  of  the
1970s.

Finally,  we  are  excited  to  introduce  a  brand-new
feature  to  aid  you  in  teaching  Historical  Thinking
Skills.  A  Thinking  Like  a  Historian  feature  in  every
chapter  includes five  to  eight  brief  sources  organized
around a central theme, such as “Beyond the Procla-
mation Line,” “Making Modern Presidents,” and “The
Suburban  Landscape  of  Cold  War  America.”  In  this
DBQ-like environment, students are asked to analyze
the documents and complete a Putting It All Together
assignment  that  asks  them  to  synthesize  and  use  the
evidence  to  create  an  argument.  Because  we  under-
stand  how  important  primary  sources  are  to  the
study  of  history,  we  are  also  pleased  to  offer  an  all-
new companion reader, Sources for America’s History,
featuring  a  wealth  of  additional  documents,  includ-
ing  unique  part  sets  tied  to  AP  Thematic  Learning
Objectives.

As in past editions, an outstanding visual program
engages students’ attention and gives them practice in
working  with  visual  sources.  The  eighth  edition  fea-
tures over 425 paintings, cartoons, illustrations, photo-
graphs, and charts, most of them in full color and more

than a quarter new to this edition. Informative captions
set  the  illustrations  in  context  and  provide  students
with  background  for  making  their  own  analysis  of
the  images  in  the  book.  Keenly  aware  that  students
lack  geographic  literacy,  we  have  included  dozens  of
maps that show major developments in the narrative,
each  with  a  caption  to  help  students  interpret  what
they see.

Taken  together,  these  documents,  figures,  maps,
and  illustrations  provide  instructors  with  a  trove  of
teaching materials, so that America’s History offers not
only  a  compelling  narrative,  but  also —  right  in  the
text —  the rich documentary materials that instructors
need to bring the past alive and introduce students to
historical analysis.

Study Aids Support
Understanding and Teach
Historical Thinking Skills
The  study  aids  in  the  eighth  edition  have  been  com-
pletely  revised  to  better  support  students  in  their
understanding  of  the  material  and  in  their  develop-
ment  of  Historical Thinking  Skills.  New  Identify  the
Big Idea questions at the start of every chapter guide
students’ reading and focus their attention on identify-
ing not just what happened, but why. A variety of learn-
ing tools from the beginning to the end of each chapter
support  this  big  idea  focus,  which  is  in  line  with  the
new AP exam’s emphasis on Thematic Learning Objec-
tives.  As  they  read,  students  will  gain  proficiency  in
Historical Thinking Skills via marginal review ques-
tions that ask them to “Identify Causes,” “Trace Change
over Time,” and “Understand Points of  View,” among
other skills. Where students are likely to stumble over
a  key  concept,  we  boldface  it  in  the  text  where  it  is
first  mentioned  and  provide  a  glossary  that  defines
each term.

In  the  Chapter  Review  section,  a  set  of  Review
Questions  is  given  for  the  chapter  as  a  whole  that
includes  a  new  Thematic  Understanding  question,
along  with  Making  Connections  questions  that  ask
students to consider broader historical issues, develop-
ments, and continuities and changes over time. A brief
list  of  More  to  Explore  sources  directs  students  to
accessible print and Web resources for additional read-
ing. Lastly, a Timeline with a new Key Turning Points
question  reminds  students  of  important  events  and
asks them to consider periodization.

