x

(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:39)(cid:34)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:27)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:41)(cid:58)(cid:1)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:35)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:44)(cid:1)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:34)(cid:58)

New Scholarship Includes
Latest Research and
Interpretations
In the new edition, we continue to offer instructors a
bold  account  of  U.S.  history  that  reflects  the  latest,
most exciting scholarship in the field. Throughout the
book,  we  have  given  increased  attention  to  political
culture and political economy, including the history of
capitalism, using this analysis to help students under-
stand how society, culture, politics, and the economy
informed one another.

With new author Eric Hinderaker aboard, we have
taken the opportunity to reconceptualize much of the
pre-1800  material.  This  edition  opens  with  two  dra-
matically revised chapters marked by closer and more
sustained  attention  to  the  way  Native  Americans
shaped,  and  were  shaped  by,  the  contact  experience
and  highlighting  the  tenuous  and  varied  nature  of
colonial experimentation. These changes carry through
the edition in a sharpened continental perspective and
expanded coverage of Native Americans, the environ-
ment, and the West in every era. We  have also brought
closer attention to the patterns and varieties of colonial
enterprise and new attention to the Atlantic World and
the  many  revolutions —  in  print,  consumption,  and
politics —  that transformed the eighteenth century.

In our coverage of the nineteenth century, the dis-
cussion  of  slavery  now  includes  material  on  African
American  childhood  and  the  impact  of  hired-out
slaves  on  black  identity.  The  spiritual  life  of  Joseph
Smith also receives greater attention, as do the complex
attitudes  of  Mormons  toward  slavery.  New  findings
have also deepened the analysis of the war with Mexico
and its impact on domestic politics. But the really new
feature  of  these  chapters  is  their  heightened  interna-
tional, indeed global, perspective.

In the post–Civil War chapters, enhanced coverage
of gender, ethnicity, and race includes greater emphasis
on gay and lesbian history and Asian and Latino immi-
gration,  alongside  the  entire  chapter  devoted  to  the
civil rights movement, a major addition to the last edi-
tion. Finally, we have kept up with recent developments
with  an  expanded  section  on  the  Obama  presidency
and the elections of 2008 and 2012.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the following scholars and teachers
who  reported  on  their  experiences  with  the  seventh
edition or reviewed features of the new edition. Their
comments often challenged us to rethink or justify our
interpretations and always provided a check on accu-
racy down to the smallest detail.

High School Reviewers:

Christine Bond-Curtright, Edmond Memorial High

School

Matthew Ellington, Ruben S. Ayala High School
Jason George, The Bryn Mawr School
Geri Hastings, Catonsville High School
Susan Ikenberry, Georgetown Day School
John Irish, John Paul II High School
Jocelyn Miner, Mercy High School
Louisa Bond Moffitt, Marist School
Caren R. B. Saunders, Kent County High School
Nancy Schick, Los Alamos High School
William A. Shelton, Trinity Valley School

College Reviewers:

Jeffrey S. Adler, University of Florida
Jennifer L. Bertolet, The George Washington University
Vicki Black, Blinn College
Stefan Bosworth, Hostos Community College
Tammy K. Byron, Dalton State College
Jessica Cannon, University of Central Missouri
Rose Darrough, Palomar College
Petra DeWitt, Missouri University of Science &

Technology

Nancy J. Duke, Daytona State College
Richard M. Filipink, Western Illinois University
Matthew Garrett, Bakersfield College
Benjamin H. Hampton, Manchester Community
College and Great Bay Community College

Isadora Helfgott, University of Wyoming
Stephanie Jannenga, Muskegon Community College
Antoine Joseph, Bryant University
Lorraine M. Lees, Old Dominion University
John S. Leiby, Paradise Valley Community College
Karen Ward Mahar, Siena College

