(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:39)(cid:34)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:27)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:41)(cid:58)(cid:1)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:35)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:44)(cid:1)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:34)(cid:58)

xi

Timothy R. Mahoney, University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Eric Mayer, Victor Valley College
Glenn Melancon, Southeastern Oklahoma State

University

James Mills, University of Texas, Brownsville
Frances Mitilineos, Oakton Community College
Anne Paulet, Humboldt State University
Thomas Ratliff, Central Connecticut State University
LeeAnn Reynolds, Samford University
Jenny Shaw, University of Alabama
Courtney Smith, Cabrini College
Timothy Thurber, Virginia Commonwealth University
Sarah E. Vandament, North Lake College of the Dallas

County Community College District

Julio Vasquez, University of Kansas
Louis Williams, St. Louis Community College–Forest

Park

As the authors of America’s History, we know better
than anyone else how much this book is the work of
other  hands  and  minds.  We  are  indebted  to  Mary
Dougherty,  William  J.  Lombardo,  Dan  McDonough,
and Jane Knetzger, who oversaw this edition, and Laura
Arcari, who asked the right questions, suggested a mul-
titude of improvements, and expertly guided the man-
uscript to completion. As usual, Denise B. Wydra and
Joan  E.  Feinberg  generously  provided  the  resources
we needed to produce an outstanding volume. Annette
Pagliaro Sweeney did a masterful job consulting with the
authors  and  seeing  the  book  through  the  production

process.  Karen  R.  Soeltz,  Sandi  McGuire,  and  Janie
Pierce-Bratcher  in  the  marketing  department  under-
stood how to communicate our vision to teachers; they
and  the  members  of  college  and  high  school  sales
forces did wonderful work in helping this edition reach
the classroom. We also thank the rest of our editorial
and production team for their dedicated efforts: Asso-
ciate  Editors  Robin  Soule  and  Jen  Jovin;  Editorial
Assistant Victoria Royal; Susan Zorn, who copyedited
the  manuscript;  proofreaders  Arthur  Johnson  and
Lindsay  DiGianvittorio;  art  researchers  Pembroke
Herbert and Sandi Rygiel at Picture Research Consul-
tants, Inc.; text permissions researcher Eve Lehmann;
and Kalina Ingham and Hilary Newman, who oversaw
permissions. Finally, we want to express our apprecia-
tion for the invaluable assistance of Patricia Deveneau,
who  expertly  suggested  topics  and  sources  for  the
Thinking  Like  a  Historian  features  in Chapters  8–14;
Kendra  Kennedy,  for  crucial  research  aid;  and  Eliza
Blanchard  and  Erin  Boss,  and  especially  Michelle
Whalen  and  the  U.S.  historians —  Robert  Brigham,
Miriam Cohen, James Merrell, and Quincy Mills —  for
their invaluable help and advice at Vassar. Many thanks
to all of you for your contributions to this new edition
of America’s History.

James A. Henretta
Eric Hinderaker
Rebecca Edwards
Robert O. Self

