Versions and Supplements

Adopters of America’s History and their students have
access  to  abundant  extra  resources,  including  docu-
ments, presentation and testing materials, the acclaimed
Bedford  Series  in  History  and  Culture  volumes,  and
much  more.  See  below  for  more  information,  visit
the  book’s  catalog  site  at  highschool.bfwpub.com
/henretta8e, or contact your local Bedford, Freeman,
and Worth sales representative.

NEW Assign LaunchPad — the Online,
Interactive e-Book in a Course Space
Enriched with Integrated Assets
The new standard in digital history, LaunchPad course
tools are so intuitive to use that teachers find it’s easy to
create assignments, track students’ work, and access a
wealth of relevant learning and teaching resources. It is
the  ideal  learning  environment  for  students  to  work
with the text, maps, documents, video, and assessment.
LaunchPad  is  loaded  with  the  full  interactive  e-book
and the Sources for America’s History documents collec-
tion — plus LearningCurve, short author video chapter
previews,  additional  primary  sources,  videos,  guided
reading exercises designed to help students read actively
for key concepts, boxed feature reading quizzes, chap-
ter  summative  quizzes,  and  more.  LaunchPad  can  be
used as is or customized, and it easily integrates with
course  management  systems.  And  with  fast  ways  to
build  assignments,  rearrange  chapters,  and  add  new
pages, sections, or links, it lets teachers build the course
materials they need and hold students accountable.

NEW Assign LearningCurve So You Know
What Your Students Know and They
Come to Class Prepared

Assigning LearningCurve in place of reading quizzes is
easy  for  instructors,  and  the  reporting  features  help
instructors  track  overall  class  trends  and  spot  topics
that are giving students trouble so they can adjust their
lectures and class activities. This online learning tool is
popular with students because it was designed to help
them  rehearse  content  at  their  own  pace  in  a  non-
threatening,  gamelike  environment.  The  feedback  for
wrong  answers  provides  instructional  coaching  and

sends  students  back  to  the  book  for  review.  Students
answer as many questions as necessary to reach a target
score,  with  repeated  chances  to  revisit  material  they
haven’t  mastered.  When  LearningCurve  is  assigned,
students come to class better prepared.

NEW Annotated Teacher’s Edition for
America’s History
The Annotated Teacher’s Edition provides a wealth of
guidance and support for AP teachers. Developed for
the AP U.S. History exam redesign, annotations include
model answers for questions in the book, teaching tips,
Historical  Thinking  Skills  practice,  pacing  guides,
exam  alerts,  and  more.  The  teacher’s  edition  helps
teachers at all levels build the most successful AP U.S.
History course they can. Authors Matthew J. Ellington
of Ruben S. Ayala Senior High School, Jason George of
the  Bryn  Mawr  School,  and  George  W.  Henry  Jr.  of
East  High  School  are  all  experienced  AP  instructors,
exam readers, and workshop leaders with a deep famil-
iarity with the AP U.S. History redesign.

Strive for a 5: Preparing for the AP U.S.
History Examination
Revised  for  the  redesigned  course,  this  print  guide
provides  students  with  narrative  and  thematic  over-
views of each historical period, chapter reviews orga-
nized around AP key concepts, and AP-style practice
exams,  including  source-based  multiple-choice  and
document-based questions as well as short- and long-
answer  essay  questions.  The  guide  is  authored  by
Warren  Hierl  of  the  Career  Center,  Winston-Salem,
NC (retired), Louisa Moffitt of Marist School, Atlanta,
GA,  and  Nancy  Schick  of  Los  Alamos  High  School,
NM (retired), all experienced AP teachers, exam read-
ers, and workshop leaders.

Take Advantage of Instructor Resources
Bedford/St.  Martin’s  has  developed  a  rich  array  of
teaching  resources  for  this  book  and  for  this  course.
They  range  from  lecture  and  presentation  materials
and  assessment  tools  to  course  management  options.
Most  can  be  downloaded  or  ordered  at  highschool
.bfwpub.com/henretta8e.

xiii

