xiv

(cid:55)(cid:38)(cid:51)(cid:52)(cid:42)(cid:48)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:47)(cid:37)(cid:1)(cid:52)(cid:54)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:45)(cid:38)(cid:46)(cid:38)(cid:47)(cid:53)(cid:52)

Computerized  Test  Bank.  The  test  bank  includes  a
mix of fresh, carefully crafted multiple-choice, short-
answer, and essay questions for each chapter. It also
contains  brand  new  source-based  multiple-choice
questions and partwide essay questions. All questions
appear in Microsoft Word format and in easy-to-use
test bank software that allows instructors to add, edit,
re-sequence,  and  print  questions  and  answers.
Instructors can also export questions into a variety of
formats,  including  Blackboard,  Desire2Learn,  and
Moodle.

NEW  Teacher’s  Survival  Guide.  Created  for  teachers,
by teachers, this unique set of resources — a test bank
and a roundtable — offers APUSH teachers assessment
tools, help with redesigning their U.S. history courses,
and thoughtful advice from veteran teachers and col-
lege professors.

Created  by  Matthew  J.  Ellington,  James  Bokern,
Michael  A.  Smith,  and  William  Polasky  III —  veteran
AP U.S. history teachers, exam readers, and workshop
leaders — the  ExamView  U.S.  History  Test  Bank  for
the New AP® Course allows teachers to create and edit
tests and quizzes for in-class or at-home use. Organized
according  to  the  redesigned  curriculum  framework,
the test bank’s nine parts include 250 formative multiple-
choice questions focused on key concepts, more than
300 stimulus-based multiple-choice questions, numer-
ous short-answer and long-essay questions, and 8 com-
plete DBQs.

The  test  bank  is  accompanied  by  Teaching  U.S.
History: A Roundtable Discussion focused on teach-
ing the new AP U.S. History course with insights from
experienced AP teachers into the redesign of the U.S.
history survey, including teaching with themes, empha-
sizing historical thinking skills, and balancing breadth
and depth in the course.

The  Bedford  Lecture  Kit  Instructor’s  Resource  CD-
ROM.  This  resource  provides  ready-made  and  fully
customizable  PowerPoint  multimedia  presentations
that include lecture outlines with embedded maps, fig-
ures, and selected images from the textbook and extra
background  for  instructors.  Also  available  are  maps
and selected images in JPEG and PowerPoint formats;
content for i>clicker, a classroom response system, in
Microsoft Word and PowerPoint formats; the Instruc-
tor’s Resource Manual in Microsoft Word format; and
outline maps in PDF format for quizzing or handing
out. All files are suitable for copying onto transparency
acetates.

NEW Teaching Ideas for AP History: A Video Resource.
This DVD is a new professional resource for teachers of
AP  United  States,  European,  and  World  History.  In
three  hours  of  interviews  with  thirty  AP  history
experts,  teachers,  and  college  professors,  this  video
offers  a  wealth  of  advice  on  varied  topics,  including
creating a syllabus, reading and writing strategies, and
specific  assignments  to  help  students  develop  their
Historical  Thinking  Skills  while  learning  historical
content. The disc also includes dozens of files —  from
lesson plans to graphic organizers —  that can be down-
loaded and used in class, as well as a series of down-
loadable  discussion  questions  for  teachers  that  allow
the DVD to be used effectively in a formal professional
development setting.

America in Motion: Video Clips for U.S. History. Set
history in motion with America in Motion, an instruc-
tor DVD containing dozens of short digital movie files
of events in twentieth-century American history. From
the wreckage of the battleship Maine to FDR’s fireside
chats to Oliver North testifying before Congress, Amer-
ica  in  Motion  engages  students  with  dynamic  scenes
from key events and challenges them to think critically.
All  files  are  classroom-ready,  edited  for  brevity,  and
easily  integrated  with  PowerPoint  or  other  presenta-
tion software for electronic lectures or assignments. An
accompanying  guide  provides  each  clip’s  historical
context, ideas for use, and suggested questions.

Videos and Multimedia. A wide assortment of videos
and  multimedia  CD-ROMs  on  various  topics  in  U.S.
history is available to qualified adopters through your
Bedford/St. Martin’s sales representative.

Package and Give Your Students Even More
Stretch your budget and package your favorite text with
more!  Many  of  the  following  resources  can  be  pack-
aged  at  minimal  additional  cost.  For  information  on
packages, discounts, and class sets, contact your local
Bedford, Freeman, and Worth sales representative.

NEW Sources for America’s History. Edited by Kevin B.
Sheets  of  SUNY  Cortland,  and  designed  to  comple-
ment the textbook, Sources for America’s History pro-
vides  a  broad  selection  of  over  225  primary-source
documents as well as editorial apparatus to help students
understand the sources. Unique part sets that support
Thematic  Learning  Objectives  are  closely  aligned  to
the  new  AP  periodization.  Available  at  a  discount
when packaged with the print text and included in the

