(cid:55)(cid:38)(cid:51)(cid:52)(cid:42)(cid:48)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:47)(cid:37)(cid:1)(cid:52)(cid:54)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:45)(cid:38)(cid:46)(cid:38)(cid:47)(cid:53)(cid:52)

xv

LaunchPad  e-book.  Also  available  on  its  own  as  a
downloadable  PDF  e-book  or  with  the  main  text’s
e-Book to Go.

guide is based on the acclaimed “History Matters” Web
site developed by the American Social History Project
and the Center for History and New Media.

NEW Bedford Digital Collections @ bedfordstmartins
.com/bdc/catalog.  This  source  collection  provides  a
flexible and affordable online repository of discovery-
oriented  primary-source  projects  and  single  primary
sources that you can easily customize and link to from
your course management system or Web site.

Trade Books. Titles published by sister companies Hill
and Wang; Farrar, Straus and Giroux; Henry Holt and
Company;  St.  Martin’s  Press;  Picador;  and  Palgrave
Macmillan are available at a discount when packaged
with  Bedford/St.  Martin’s  textbooks.  For  more  infor-
mation, visit bedfordstmartins.com/tradeup.

The  Bedford  Series  in  History  and  Culture.  More
than  120  titles  in  this  highly  praised  series  combine
first-rate  scholarship, historical  narrative,  and  impor-
tant  primary  documents  for  undergraduate  courses.
Each book is brief, inexpensive, and focused on a spe-
cific topic or period. For a complete list of titles, visit
bedfordstmartins.com/history/series.

Rand McNally Atlas of American History. This collec-
tion of over eighty full-color maps illustrates key events
and  eras,  from  early  exploration,  settlement,  expan-
sion,  and  immigration  to  U.S.  involvement  in  wars
abroad  and  on  U.S.  soil.  Introductory  pages  for  each
section include a brief overview, timelines, graphs, and
photos to quickly establish a historical context.

Maps in Context: A Workbook for American History.
Written  by  historical  cartography  expert  Gerald  A.
Danzer  (University  of  Illinois  at  Chicago),  this  skill-
building workbook helps students comprehend essen-
tial  connections  between  geographic  literacy  and
historical understanding. Organized to correspond to
the typical U.S. history survey course, Maps in Context
presents a wealth of map-centered projects and conve-
nient pop quizzes that give students hands-on experi-
ence working with maps.

The  Bedford  Glossary  for  U.S.  History.  This  handy
supplement  for  the  survey  course  gives  students  his-
torically  contextualized  definitions  for  hundreds  of
terms — from abolitionism to zoot suit — that they will
encounter in lectures, reading, and exams.

U.S. History Matters: A Student Guide to U.S. History
Online. This resource, written by Alan Gevinson, Kelly
Shrum,  and  the  late  Roy  Rosenzweig  (all  of  George
Mason University), provides an illustrated and anno-
tated guide to 250 of the most useful Web sites for stu-
dent  research  in  U.S.  history  as  well  as  advice  on
evaluating  and  using  Internet  sources.  This  essential

A  Pocket  Guide  to  Writing  in  History.  This  portable
and affordable reference tool by Mary Lynn Rampolla
provides reading, writing, and research advice useful to
students in all history courses. Concise yet comprehen-
sive advice on approaching typical history assignments,
developing critical reading skills, writing effective his-
tory  papers,  conducting  research,  using  and  docu-
menting sources, and avoiding plagiarism —  enhanced
with  practical  tips  and  examples  throughout —  has
made this slim reference a best-seller.

A Student’s Guide to History. This complete guide to
success in any history course provides the practical help
students need to be successful. In addition to introduc-
ing students to the nature of the discipline, author Jules
Benjamin teaches a wide range of skills, from prepar-
ing for exams to approaching common writing assign-
ments,  and  explains  the  research  and  documentation
process with plentiful examples.

Going to the Source: The Bedford Reader in American
History.  Developed  by  Victoria  Bissell  Brown  and
Timothy  J.  Shannon,  this  reader’s  strong  pedagogical
framework  helps  students  learn  how  to  ask  fruitful
questions  in  order  to  evaluate  documents  effectively
and  develop  critical  reading  skills.  The  reader’s  wide
variety  of  chapter  topics  that  complement  the  survey
course and its rich diversity of sources —  from personal
letters to political cartoons —  provoke students’ inter-
est while teaching them the skills they need to success-
fully interrogate historical sources.

America  Firsthand.  With  its  distinctive  focus  on
ordinary  people,  this  primary  documents  reader,  by
Anthony Marcus, John M. Giggie, and David Burner,
offers a remarkable range of perspectives on America’s
history from those who lived it. Popular Points of View
sections expose students to different perspectives on a
specific  event  or  topic,  and  Visual  Portfolios  invite
analysis of the visual record.

