Historical Thinking, Reading,
and Writing Skills for AP U.S. History

DAVE NEUMANN, Director
The History Project at California State University–Long Beach

Students and adults alike often grumble that history is
just a bunch of facts to memorize. While it’s true that
studying  history  requires  data,  information,  and  yes,
facts, that’s not the essence of what history is. History is
a  way  of  thinking  about  the  world  by  looking  at  the
past. It is a reconstruction of the past, drawing on both
imagination and interpretation. In this effort historians
use a number of skills. This skills primer will help you
develop the Historical Thinking Skills you need to suc-
ceed in any Advanced Placement history course and on
the exams. It  will also enable you to improve critical-
thinking, reading, and writing skills that will be useful
in college or whatever endeavor you pursue after high
school.

Historical Thinking Skills
Historical thinking requires understanding and evalu-
ating change and continuity over time. It also involves
making  appropriate  use  of  historical  evidence  in
answering questions and developing arguments about
the  past.  Each  historian  would  describe  the  various
skills needed for this complex task slightly differently,
but for AP history courses, they have been organized
into four major skills that represent the ways historians
study  the  past.  These  skills  have  been  described  as
“habits of mind.” This useful phrase should remind you
that  a  skill  needs  to  be  practiced  repeatedly  until  it
becomes second nature. Because practice is an integral
part of learning to think historically, the sections below
include exercises to help you develop these “habits of
mind.”  Like  shooting  free  throws,  rehearsing  dance
moves,  or  playing  scales,  Historical  Thinking  Skills
need to be exercised regularly until you can use them
easily and almost effortlessly.

As we discuss each skill separately below, keep in
mind  that  these  skills  overlap  in  many  ways.  For
example, you can’t make a historical argument without
also evaluating evidence. So as  you develop one His-
torical Thinking Skill, you will also be practicing other
skills. The first three skills are all necessary to move on

to the fourth —  interpretation and synthesis —  in which
you will bring what you have learned together.

Chronological Reasoning
“Chronological  reasoning”  means  thinking  logically
about  how  and  why  the  world  changes —  or,  some-
times,  stays  the  same —  over  time.  While  all  fields  of
knowledge offer arguments based on evidence or make
comparisons, historians are uniquely concerned about
the past and its relationship to the present. How is the
world different now than it was 50 years ago, 500 years
ago,  or  5,000  years  ago?  Why  did  the  world  change?
How  have  some  aspects  of  the  world  remained  rela-
tively  the  same  over  long  periods  of  time?  On  what
basis do historians simplify the long and complicated
past by breaking it into smaller eras?

Historical  Causation  Causation  has  to  do  with
explanations about how or why changes take place in
history.  Sometimes  there  is  an  obvious  connection
between an event and its consequence, like a cue ball
striking the eight ball and making it move. And some
events  are  fairly  straightforward:  the  attack  on  Pearl
Harbor prompted President Roosevelt to ask Congress
for  a  declaration  of  war  against  Japan.  But  even  this
seemingly  simple  example  soon  becomes  more  com-
plicated. Why did Japan attack the United States? What
role did the American embargo on the sale of oil have
on Japan’s decision? Why did the United States enact
this embargo? All of these other events took place just
a  few  years  before  the  Pearl  Harbor  attack.  If  we  go
even further back, we’ll gain additional insight about
the  larger  context  of  the  Japanese  government’s  deci-
sion. A longer-term analysis might lead, for example,
to an understanding of Japanese imperial aggression as
an  outgrowth  of  their  rapid  industrialization  during
the Meiji Restoration of the late nineteenth century.

Just as there were many factors behind the attack
on Pearl Harbor, most examples of historical causation
involve  multiple  causes  and  effects.  Events  and  pro-
cesses often result from developments in many realms
of life, including social, political, economic, and cultural.

xxxviii

