(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:36)(cid:34)(cid:45)(cid:1)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:34)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:47)(cid:37)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:53)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:1)(cid:52)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:45)(cid:45)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:39)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:49)(cid:1)(cid:54)(cid:15)(cid:52)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:58)

xliii

Interpretation  Historians  interpret  both  primary
and secondary sources, evaluating points of view and
considering context to create their own interpretations.
Through analyzing different historical interpretations,
you will see how historical interpretations change over
time.  We  have  already  established  that  formulating  a
historical  argument  requires  making  inferences  from
evidence.  The  background  of  a  particular  historian
(age, gender, nationality, political philosophy, time of
writing,  etc.)  often  shapes  the  way  he  or  she  under-
stands or interprets the past. In many cases, knowing
something  about  the  context  of  a  historian  can  help
you  understand  his  or  her  argument  better —  in  the
same way that understanding the context of the author
of  a  primary  source  helps  you  understand  the  pri-
mary  source.  Sometimes  this  information  can  help
you identify the prejudices or limitations of a particu-
lar interpretation.

For example, in the early 1960s the British historian
Hugh Trevor-Roper claimed that Africa had no history
until Europeans took over the continent, an argument
that built on the ideas of many earlier European think-
ers, especially those of the nineteenth-century German
philosopher Georg Hegel. Subsequent scholarship has
shown this conclusion to be faulty, and we can assume
that  several  aspects  of  Trevor-Roper’s  situation  influ-
enced his point of view. For one, he was a historian of
early modern and modern Europe who thought, as did
many  historians  of  his  generation,  that  history  could
only  be  based  on  written  documents.  Because  there
were fewer of these for Africa before colonization than
for  Europe  at  the  same  time,  he  jumped  to  the  con-
clusion  that  Africa  had  no  history.  Historians  since
Trevor-Roper  have  broadened  the  source  base  that
they  use  in  their  research  to  incorporate  many  other
types of sources, and they have also demonstrated that
there  are,  in  fact,  many  written  documents  relating
to  Africa  that  Trevor-Roper  did  not  know  about  or
chose  to  ignore  with  his  comment.  His  choice  to
ignore these may have been influenced by the fact that
he was a citizen of an imperial nation writing during
decolonization.

Be  careful  when  analyzing  historical  interpreta-
tions. You can’t simply assume that because a scholar
has  x  background  he  or  she  will  make  y  argument.
There  are  far  too  many  exceptions  for  such  a  rule.
Instead,  begin  by  finding  out  what  you  can  about  a
scholar’s  background  and  then  make  a  hunch  about
how  his  or  her  background  might  shape  his  or  her
views. Then, as you read the arguments carefully, look
for evidence that the author actually makes the kinds of

arguments you anticipated. If you don’t find such evi-
dence, discard your hunch.

Synthesis  Synthesis  is  a  culminating  skill  that
reflects  your  ability  to  make  persuasive  arguments  of
your own from evidence. It draws on all of the other
Historical Thinking Skills —  historical argumentation,
appropriate use of relevant historical evidence, causa-
tion,  continuity  and  change,  periodization,  compari-
son, contextualization, and interpretation —  along with
two  other  elements.  First,  you  may  need  to  draw  on
evidence outside the field of history. This might come
from the social sciences, such as archaeology, anthro-
pology, economics, or sociology; it might come from
the humanities, such as art history or literary studies;
or it might even come from the natural sciences, such
as biology or chemistry. The other element is the ability
to apply insights from historical evidence to a new set-
ting. This is a creative form of comparison. You might
link some moment in the past to a more recent issue,
for example, the African civil rights movement of the
1960s  and  1970s  to  Reconstruction,  or  compare  how
the  United  States  has  tended  to  underestimate  the
strength of nationalism in other people, as evidenced
by the Iraq and Vietnam wars. In so doing, you will be
using  the  past  to  shed  light  on  the  present.  You  will
have taken a major step in historical thinking, as mak-
ing connections is a key part of what historians do.

Getting the Most Out
of Reading History
Active  reading  means  reading  for  meaning.  The  big
challenges  of  reading  are  length  and  detail.  If  you
understand the “big picture,” you can read much more
quickly and effectively, because you can “see the forest
for the trees.” That is, you can see the main ideas and
recognize how specific information is provided to illus-
trate  those  big  ideas.  The  three  stages  of  reading
described below will help you understand the “big pic-
ture” when reading this text and others.

Before Reading (Prereading)
When approaching a text such as this one, it is helpful
to  spend  a  few  minutes  prereading  the  material  of  a
chapter. During this stage, you are simply getting pre-
pared for what you will be reading. This involves sev-
eral steps. First, determine the chronology and major

