(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:36)(cid:34)(cid:45)(cid:1)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:34)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:47)(cid:37)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:53)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:1)(cid:52)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:45)(cid:45)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:39)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:49)(cid:1)(cid:54)(cid:15)(cid:52)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:58)

xlv

of relevant historical evidence, including evidence gath-
ered by scholars in other fields, such as archaeologists
and  anthropologists  who  study  the  remains  of  early
native peoples; present a periodization of the thousands
of years before European contact, when the peoples of
the Western Hemisphere were largely isolated from the
rest of the world; compare the trade networks and reli-
gious practices of Native American groups; contextu-
alize the different ways that societies developed within
the processes of climate and geography; and develop an
interpretation about the development of diverse groups
across the Americas that synthesizes information from
different sources and fields of inquiry.

Asking questions is thus an essential way to develop
Historical Thinking Skills. For every section you read,
you  might  begin  with  the  very  basic  “reporter  ques-
tions”: Who? What? Where? When? Why?

1.  Who is the section about? History texts are almost
always about people. Is the focus an individual? A
social group? A political entity?

2.  What  does  the  section  say  about  this  person  or
group? Texts usually describe some major event or
pattern.  Did  they  do  something  important?  Did
something happen to them?

3.  Where did the subject being described take place?
Physical  location  is  often  crucial  in  history.  Does
this location help make sense of the subject in some
way?

4.  When did the events take place? Like physical loca-
tion, chronology forms part of the historical con-
text  that  makes  events  understandable.  Does  the
text describe something unfolding over a very short
period —  or a longer one? Are there crucial events
that came before that make the description under-
standable?

5.  Why did the event or pattern being described take
place —  and  why  does  it  matter?  Whether  talking
about a dramatic development or a continuity that
endured for a long period of time, historians always
attempt to understand what led to it. What reasons
does the text provide for the event or pattern? How
is the significance of the development explained?

Clarifying  As you read, ask yourself if there are any
words  you  don’t  understand.  Some  of  these  will  be
included as key terms defined in the margins, but not
all will. When it comes to vocabulary, use good judg-
ment.  Is  the  word  crucial  for  understanding  the  pas-
sage?  If  not,  read  right  past  it,  as  the  meaning  may
become clearer as you read further in the text. If it is a
crucial word, you may need to look it up in a dictionary.

When  a  longer  passage  throws  you  off,  usually
clearing up difficult vocabulary will help make the pas-
sage clearer. If it doesn’t, simply reread the sentence a
few  times  (slowly!).  If  you’re  still  unclear,  back  up —
usually  to  the  beginning  of  the  paragraph —  and  try
again. The most common way skilled readers get clari-
fication is simply by rereading.

Summarizing  A  summary  is  a  brief  review  of  the
“big  picture”  of  a  particular  section  or  chapter.  After
reading, briefly explain what each section is about in
one sentence —  being sure your summary considers all
five  of  the  “reporter  questions”  from  the  Questioning
section  above.  If  you  are  summarizing  a  section, you
might  think  of  this  as  answering  the  main  question
posed in the section. For example, a summary of the
first section in Chapter 1, “How did landscape, climate,
and  resources  influence  the  development  of  Native
American  societies?”  might  be:  Native  Americans
(who) in present-day Mexico and Peru (where) began
raising  domesticated  crops  (what)  around  6000  b.c.
(when),  and  as  agriculture  spread  northward  across
much of North America, agricultural surpluses led to
population growth and facilitated the growth of diverse
urban societies (why).

Predicting  Based on your reading of an entire sec-
tion or chapter, what do you think will come next in
the text? How do you know? You may think predicting
what’s coming next is a waste of time, but it’s a really
good test of how well you understand the flow of the
text. If you’re in a car with your family going to visit
your grandmother, you probably know the route to get
there.  If  your  mother  takes  an  unanticipated  turn,  it
alerts  you  that  something  is  different  from  what  you
were  expecting —  and  prompts  you  to  ask  why.  So  if
your prediction based on reading is wildly off, it may
alert you to the fact that your previous idea of the “big
picture”  of  the  section  was  off  for  some  reason.  You
may need to back up and reread a section, or at  least
move forward more alert to where the author is going.
Again using the first section of Chapter 1 as an example,
what  do  you  imagine  will  happen  to  native  peoples
after European contact?

Note-Taking  Of  course,  simply  reading  the  text  is
not sufficient. You’ll never remember everything that’s
important unless you take notes. Students experience
many pitfalls when taking notes. You should only write
notes after you understand what you have read. Actively
question, clarify, summarize, and predict in your head
(or  out  loud)  as  you  read  each  chapter,  and  then  go

