(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:36)(cid:34)(cid:45)(cid:1)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:34)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:47)(cid:37)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:53)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:1)(cid:52)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:45)(cid:45)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:39)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:49)(cid:1)(cid:54)(cid:15)(cid:52)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:58)

xlvii

makes an argument addressing the prompt. Your thesis
should be as brief as possible while still addressing the
complexity  of  the  topic.  If  your  thesis  explicitly
responds to each of the three prompt elements clearly
and  accurately —  if  it  includes  the  subjects,  the  time
period,  and  the  task —  you  will  have  a  strong  thesis.
And you’ll be on your way to a persuasive essay.

Every  essay  needs  to  be  organized  into  distinct
paragraphs. The number of paragraphs depends on the
complexity of the prompt. Typically, however, two body
paragraphs  won’t  be  sufficient  to  address  the  topic
thoroughly. What’s most important is that you clearly
announce the point you’re going to make in each para-
graph  through  a  topic  sentence  that  effectively  covers
the subject of the paragraph. Any content in the para-
graph  that  doesn’t  support  the  topic  sentence  doesn’t
belong there.

Finally, every essay requires you to make use of evi-
dence to support your claims. The type of evidence also
differs depending on the type of essay. The document-
based  question  (DBQ)  requires  you  to  reference  the
documents included with the question, while the other
essays  require  you  to  draw  on  information  that  you
know. In every case, however, you need to both discuss
relevant  historical  information  you’ve  learned  during
the course and then explain how that information sup-
ports your claim.

While many of these writing suggestions would apply
equally to essays in other academic subjects, the essay
types on AP  history exams are all geared to the con-
cerns of historians. Each type of essay requires the use
of the Historical Thinking Skills discussed earlier, often
in combination with one another. For example, every
essay type requires you to discuss the historical context
of the subject you’re writing about and to appropriately
use relevant evidence to develop an interpretation and
argument about the past. Every essay requires you to go
beyond  simply  listing  factual  information  to  analyze
that information. In fact, “analyze” is commonly used
as a question prompt in all types of essays.

Document-Based Questions
The document-based question, or DBQ, is a defining
feature of all AP history exams. Of all the essays, this
one  tends  to  make  students  the  most  anxious.  But
much  of  this  anxiety  is  misplaced.  Once  you  under-
stand  the  DBQ,  you  will  feel  less  worried  about  it —
and may even come to find it your favorite essay type.
Unlike the other essays, for which you have to call on
your memory to provide all the evidence, the documents
in the DBQ form the basic evidence you need to use.

To do well on a DBQ, you need to go beyond the
content of the documents in order to set the context,
make  a  clear  argument,  and  analyze  the  documents
properly.  Using  documents  as  evidence  requires  the
sophisticated analysis skills we discussed in the section
“Appropriate  Use  of  Relevant  Historical  Evidence.”
That means that you have to consider the perspective
or  point  of  view  of  the  documents.  Every  primary
source —  textual, visual, or statistical —  was created for
a specific purpose. Even if the author is an eyewitness
or  participant,  people  construct  different  accounts  of
the same event, which are shaped by their perspective.
That doesn’t necessarily mean the author intentionally
wrote it to mislead or provide only part of the story, but
every document is limited and imperfect in the infor-
mation it provides.

As with all essay questions, be sure your introduc-
tory  paragraph  includes  a  clear  and  focused  thesis
statement  that  encapsulates  your  argument.  Use  the
“reporter  questions” —  Who?  What?  When?  Where?
Why? —   to interrogate each document, and then con-
sider the limitations of each document before writing
your DBQ. Then be sure to incorporate these insights
about document limitations into the essay itself to make
your essay more analytical —  and therefore stronger.

Consider the photo of men from the Kansas Volun-
teer  Infantry  during  the  Civil  War  on  page  454  in
Chapter 14. Students tend to view a document like that
as a straightforward factual record. After all, we often
hear that “pictures don’t lie.” But the picture was taken
for a  particular purpose by someone who decided to
arrange the shot so that the soldiers would appear in
uniform  posed  with  their  rifles.  So  it’s  worth  asking
why  the  photographer  took  the  picture  in  this  way.
What purpose might this picture serve? What message
might it convey to someone who saw it at the time it
was taken? How might it misrepresent —  or represent
in a limited way —  the realities of the soldier experience?
Purposes can be stated explicitly by the maker of a
source, or they can be determined later by those ana-
lyzing  the  source,  including  you  as  you  write  your
answer to a DBQ. Sometimes the purposes given by the
maker  and  by  later  historians  are  different  from  one
another.  For  example,  during  the  Renaissance,  Euro-
pean  city  governments  issued  laws  limiting  what
people could spend on clothing or family celebrations
such  as  weddings.  The  governments  stated  that  the
purpose of these laws was to restrict wasteful spending,
but  later  historians  studying  these  laws  have  deter-
mined that their purpose was also to sharpen distinc-
tions between social classes. For many of the documents
you will be using to answer a DBQ, you will need to

