xlviii  (cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:36)(cid:34)(cid:45)(cid:1)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:34)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:47)(cid:37)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:53)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:1)(cid:52)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:45)(cid:45)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:39)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:49)(cid:1)(cid:54)(cid:15)(cid:52)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:58)

make  your  best  judgment  about  the  purpose,  just  as
historians do.

You also need to corroborate your documents. That
means  bringing  the  documents  into  “conversation”
with each other. Since the documents in a DBQ don’t
directly refer to each other, you have to use your intu-
ition  to  see  connections.  This  relates  to  a  distinctive
task about the DBQ: you need to organize the evidence
from the documents into several categories or groups —
usually  at  least  three.  The  categories  are  sometimes
stated or implied in the prompt, but you’ll often have
to call on your knowledge of history and the content
of the documents themselves to determine what cate-
gories  (and  how  many)  make  sense.  Please  note  that
because  you  can  use  the  same  document  multiple
times, you often have flexibility in coming up with cat-
egories.  You  might  choose  to  group  the  documents
according  to  geography,  or  the  social  status  of  their
authors,  or  the  type  of  document,  or  what  they  say
about the issue discussed in the question, or according
to any number of other lines of connection.

In all of the American Voices and Thinking Like a
Historian  features  in  this  book,  the  authors  have
included  multiple  primary  sources  that  address  the
same or related topics, along with questions that allow
you to bring the documents in conversation with each
other just as you will for a DBQ. For example, in Chap-
ter 5, the feature Thinking Like a Historian, “Beyond
the  Proclamation  Line”  includes  six  brief  primary
sources  of  the  types  that  you  might  encounter  on  a
DBQ  that  speak  to  life  in  “Indian  country”  between
1763 and 1776. Voices range from the crown’s superin-
tendent for Indian affairs in the northern colonies, to a
Baptist minister’s description of the trading communi-
ties of the Ohio Valley, to a list of grievances by a Dela-
ware  headman.  Comparison  is  one  of  the  Historical
Thinking Skills identified for AP history exams, and it
is often a task word in essay questions, so use the docu-
ment  features  and  questions  in  this  book  to  practice
the skills needed for the DBQ.

Finally, you have to draw on your outside knowl-
edge. To do well, you need to position the DBQ doc-
uments  within  the  broader  context  of  the  period,
drawing on what  you’ve learned from your textbook,
from  your  teacher,  and  from  any  outside  reading  or
research that you’ve done. Feel free to mention other
sources  that  you  may  have  encountered  previously,
especially if they offer a perspective that is missing or if
the addition of outside sources helps to support your
argument. In the “Beyond the Proclamation Line” fea-
ture, for example, if these were the sources provided for
a DBQ, you would use the information in the textbook,

especially that in the section “The Problem of the West”
on pages 163–166, to provide broader context for your
answer.

Long-Essay Questions
Along with the DBQ, AP history exams contain other
essay questions, called “thematic essays,” “free response
questions,” or simply “long essays.” This type of essay
question tests your ability to use information that you
already know to answer a specific question that draws
on  one  or  more  Historical  Thinking  Skills.  Like  the
DBQ,  essay  questions  have  different  task  verbs  that
correspond  to  different  Historical  Thinking  Skills.
Three of the most common of these involve change and
continuity, causation, and comparison.

Change  and  Continuity  Questions  For questions
that focus on change over time, you will have to iden-
tify major changes and explain the significance of those
changes —  that  is,  why  the  changes  matter —  for  the
topic  described  in  the  prompt.  You  will  also  have  to
analyze why something changed. If the question prompt
asks  about  both  change  and  continuity,  your  thesis
statement and the essay itself must clearly address both
elements. A strong argument must do more than sim-
ply  identify  some  continuities  and  changes.  It  has  to
analyze why both the continuities and changes existed
and why they mattered. (The Making Connections ques-
tions that appear at the end of each chapter often ask
you to analyze continuity and change over time, so they
are good practice for this type of essay.) It’s a good idea
to weigh the relative value of continuities and changes.
In other words, do you perceive continuities to have
been more powerful than changes on the topic addressed
in the prompt, or vice versa? Why do you think so?

In terms of structure, avoid the temptation to orga-
nize your essay into two large paragraphs, one for conti-
nuities and one for changes. Instead, identify important
topics  or  categories  of  comparison —  governmental
structure, immigration patterns, or gender relations —
and use those topics as the body paragraphs. Then, in
each  body  paragraph,  address  both  continuities  and
changes, being clear to signal your transition from one
to the other.

In the same way that identifying change is an easier
Historical  Thinking  Skill  than  identifying  continuity,
change  is  also  easier  to  write  about  than  continuity.
U.S.  history  narratives  devote  a  lot  of  time  to,  say,
how American Christianity changed as a result of the
Great Awakening. So if you’re writing an essay about
eighteenth-century  religion,  that  information  will

