(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:36)(cid:34)(cid:45)(cid:1)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:34)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:47)(cid:37)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:53)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:1)(cid:52)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:45)(cid:45)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:39)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:49)(cid:1)(cid:54)(cid:15)(cid:52)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:58)

xlix

come  to  mind  more  quickly.  After  brief  reflection,
however, you’ll realize that certain aspects of American
Christianity did not change with the Great Awakening.
Therefore, along with changes, you will want to iden-
tify several major continuities, such as Martin Luther’s
belief in the priesthood of all Christians or the influ-
ence of clergy. Then you will need to discuss why these
were  significant  and  suggest  some  reasons  why  they
did not change.

Question  prompts  about  change  and  continuity
may  not  always  be  phrased  in  exactly  those  words.
Often they might ask you to assess the impact of some-
thing  (or  someone)  on  something  else,  analyze  the
influence of something on something else, or analyze
the extent to which something shaped something else.
Thinking a bit about such questions, you can recognize
that they are actually about change and continuity. To
assess the impact or influence of A on B, you will need
to decide what changed in B as a result of A. To write a
good  essay  about  this,  you  will  also  need  to  discuss
what did not change, and why —  in other words, conti-
nuities. For example, a question might ask you to assess
the impact of World War I on U.S. culture and society
in the 1920s and 1930s. You can see that this question
is  about  change  and  continuity:  what  changed  as  a
result of the war, and what did not change. As  in the
example  of  the  Great  Awakening,  it  is  often  easier  to
remember what changed than to recall what stayed the
same, but a strong essay will consider both. A strong
essay might also go beyond the direct impact of World
War  I  to  include  broader  cultural  changes  that  relate
more indirectly to the war. If you do this, however, be
sure  to  relate  everything  you  include  to  the  prompt,
and  do  not  use  the  question  as  an  opportunity  for  a
“data dump” of everything you can think of about the
1920s and 1930s. Throwing in a lot of extraneous infor-
mation to pad your answer will not improve it.

Causation  Questions  Questions  about  change,  or
about impact or influence, are also about causation, for
any  good  answer  will  go  beyond  what  happened  to
why.  Asking  why  is  at  the  heart  of  what  historians —
including the AP history text makers —  mean by analy-
sis.  A  quick  way  to  see  whether  you  have  provided
analysis in your answer is to see whether it includes the
word because. There are many other ways to analyze,
but  most  sentences  containing  the  word  because  at
least attempt to analyze something.

Some question prompts might also address causa-
tion  directly,  asking  you  to  explain  the  reasons  for
something  or  analyze  the  causes  for  something.  The
historical  causation  chart  on  page  xxxix  will  provide

you with a good way to structure your answer. Take a
question  about  the  causes  of  Columbus’s  voyages  of
exploration,  for  example.  After  your  thesis  statement
that directly addresses the prompt of the question, you
could  begin  with  large-scale  processes  that  developed
over centuries. These might include trading networks
through  which  Europeans  became  familiar  with  the
products  of  Asia  and  Africa,  such  as  spices,  silk,  and
ivory; conflicts between Christianity and Islam, which
had  especially  shaped  Spanish  culture  in  the  many
centuries when Christians fought Muslims for control
of  the  Iberian  peninsula;  and  improvements  in  ship
design and navigational instruments. Then you could
move  to  complex  causes  that  were  more  immediate:
the expansion of the Ottoman Empire, which disrupted
old trade routes and lessened the direct access of West-
ern Europeans to exotic luxuries; the aims of the Span-
ish monarchs Ferdinand and Isabella to compete with
Portugal in the race for direct access to spices and to
continue the expansion of Christianity; the invention
of  the  printing  press,  which  allowed  work  by  earlier
geographers and travelers to be cheap and accessible to
ship captains and merchants; and Columbus’s personal
ambition, desire for glory, and religious fervor.

If the question prompt is about consequences as well
as causes, you can continue using the chart to discuss
the many consequences of Columbus’s voyages. Among
these were unintended consequences, which begin with
one  that  seems  almost  too  obvious:  Columbus’s  voy-
ages made Europeans aware that there were large land-
masses in the world other than the ones they already
knew about. (This is what we mean by “discovering” —
becoming  aware  of  something  that  is  already  there.)
As you probably know, at first Columbus did not rec-
ognize what he had discovered, and even after he did,
he spent most of his efforts trying to get around these
new  lands  to  reach  Asia,  his  intended  destination.
Although Columbus claimed the lands that he explored
for Spain, he (and the Spanish monarchs who backed
him) was primarily looking for trade connections, not
lands to conquer. So you might even choose to argue
that  colonization  was  an  unintended  consequence.
Beyond  this  are  a  range  of  changes  that  were  truly
unintended, such as the widespread exchange  of ani-
mals, plants, human populations, and diseases across
the Atlantic in both directions, later called the “Colum-
bian Exchange.”

Again  depending  on  the  exact  question  prompt,
you  might  also  want  to  discuss  contingency,  the  fact
that things might have turned out differently. One of
the  most  common  problems  in  analyzing  cause  and
effect  in  the  past  is  that  we  know  the  outcome,  or  at

