l

(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:36)(cid:34)(cid:45)(cid:1)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:34)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:47)(cid:37)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:53)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:1)(cid:52)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:45)(cid:45)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:39)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:49)(cid:1)(cid:54)(cid:15)(cid:52)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:58)

least the outcome up to now. It is thus very tempting to
view  developments  teleologically,  that  is,  as  leading
inevitably  to  the  outcome  that  we  know  happened.
Immediately  after  a  game  is  over,  for  example,  com-
mentators  often  explain  why  the  team  that  won  was
destined to win, although if the other team had won,
they would have a ready explanation for that as  well.
Immediately  after  an  election,  the  loser’s  strategy  is
analyzed  as  faulty  and  misguided,  although  if  the
results  had  been  different,  the  same  strategy  would
have been praised as brilliant. In this example, all large-
scale processes and long- and short-term causes seem
to  lead  to  Columbus.  It  is  easy  to  imagine  the  story
turning out differently, however. An Aztec conquest of
Europe would not have been a possibility, but Colum-
bus’s ships could have easily sunk on the first voyage.
Or Ferdinand and Isabella could have said no. Or John
Cabot —  like Columbus, an Italian trying to get back-
ing for voyages from a Western European monarch —
could have moved to England slightly earlier than he
did  and  convinced  Henry  VII  of  England  to  support
him in 1490 instead of 1496. Not every question about
causation  will  lend  itself  to  thinking  about  possible
alternate scenarios so easily, but in every one there are
some lines of causation that are coincidental.

Comparison Questions  Another Historical Think-
ing Skill often involved in essay questions is compari-
son,  with  questions  that  might  be  phrased  “compare
and  contrast . . .”  or  “analyze  similarities  and  differ-
ences . . .” Your thesis statement should focus on major
similarities  and  differences,  but  it  cannot  simply  be
“there  were  similarities  and  differences  in  A  and  B.”
Instead it must include some information about how A
and B were similar or different. When you place two
presidents,  two  ways  of  thinking,  or  two  revolutions
side by side, what do you notice? How are they similar?
How are they different? One good way to structure the
thesis for a comparative question is: Although A and B
were different in C, they were similar in D.

Once  you  move  beyond  the  most  basic  level  of
identifying broad similarities and differences, you need
to  be  more  precise.  You  should  begin  by  teasing  out
both categories in more detail, providing specific evi-
dence  to  support  your  broad  generalizations.  For
example,  in  broad  terms  the  American,  French,  and
Haitian  revolutions  all  included  demands  for  liberty
and  equality,  and  all  of  them  significantly  expanded
citizenship rights. In all three these rights were limited
to  men,  another  similarity  among  them.  But  only  in
the Haitian Revolution, when a massive revolt ended
slavery  and  won  Haiti’s  independence  from  France,

were those rights extended to men of African descent.
Just  as  with  change  and  continuity,  it’s  often  worth-
while  to  indicate  whether  you  think  similarities  are
more significant than differences, or vice versa, and why.
You need to be careful about the structure of this
essay. Many students fall into the trap of simply describ-
ing topic 1 in a body paragraph and topic 2 in a sepa-
rate  body  paragraph.  They  assume  that  readers  will
be  able  to  recognize  the  similarities  and  differences
between the two topics on their own. But you’ll never
earn a high score that way.

After your introductory paragraph and thesis state-
ment, always begin each body paragraph with a topic
sentence that introduces the category or topic you want
to compare. Your comparisons need to be explicit and
concrete. Be sure to use clear signal words that iden-
tify that you are shifting from similarity to difference
(“Despite  these  similarities  during  times  of  financial
crisis, the two presidents differed dramatically.”) In the
contrast portion of your essay, be clear about the par-
ticular difference, making use of contrast words such as
conversely, unlike, and however to signal your point to
the reader.

In brainstorming similarities, try to step back and
think in more abstract conceptual terms so you don’t
miss deep similarities that seem different on the sur-
face. For example, students sometimes say that a king is
different from an emperor, because they focus on the
different titles. But both are hereditary monarchs typi-
cally  viewed  as  having  divine  authority  to  rule.  That
makes them very similar in deep ways, despite the dif-
ferent labels. They are much more similar to each other
than  they  are  to,  say,  a  democracy  or  a  communist
regime.

Students sometimes wonder whether the first body
paragraph should focus on similarities or differences.
One approach is to deal with the less significant topic
first,  get  it  out  of  the  way,  and  then  move  on  to  the
more  significant  topic.  But  that  is  really  a  matter  of
taste.  What  is  important  is  that  you  provide  a  clear
transition  when  you  move  from  the  compare  to  the
contrast portion of your essay (or vice versa): “These
similarities [that you’ve just discussed], however, were
much less crucial than differences in x, y, and z.” If this
sounds  like  a  repeat  of  your  thesis  statement,  that’s
because  it  is.  In  the  body  of  your  essay,  you  want  to
echo  the  road  map,  your  thesis,  to  help  your  reader
know that you are now making the transition that your
introductory paragraph said you would be making.

You  might  be  thinking  that  the  suggestions  here
about answering comparative questions sound similar
to those about answering change-over-time questions,

