(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:36)(cid:34)(cid:45)(cid:1)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:34)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:47)(cid:37)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:53)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:1)(cid:52)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:45)(cid:45)(cid:52)(cid:1)(cid:39)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:1)(cid:34)(cid:49)(cid:1)(cid:54)(cid:15)(cid:52)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:58)

li

and you would be absolutely right. Embedded (and not
very  deeply)  in change-over-time  questions  are  com-
parisons, for the only way that you can identify some-
thing as a change or continuity, or assess the impact of
something on something else, is to compare them. To
transform  these  comparisons  into  analysis,  you  will
need to provide relevant historical evidence, contextu-
alize the developments you are discussing, and evalu-
ate causes and effects. As we have said all along, all of
the Historical Thinking Skills are related, which is why
the final thinking skill is synthesis: “the ability to arrive
at meaningful and persuasive understandings of the past
by applying all of the other Historical Thinking Skills.”*

Many students feel anxious about having to write
the  AP  history  essays.  But  once  you  become  familiar
with  the  elements  of  each  prompt  and  know  how  to
address  them  effectively,  you’ll  realize  that  there’s  no
reason to be stressed. In fact, you should feel confident
as you approach the writing portion of the test. Unlike
the multiple-choice portion of the AP exam, the essay
section gives you a lot of freedom to demonstrate what
you know in an open-ended way. And if you’ve been
thinking  historically,  reading  the  text  with  that  lens,
and sharing your ideas in class, you may begin to look
forward to an opportunity to show just how developed
your Historical Thinking Skills are.

*http://advancesinap.collegeboard.org/historical-thinking

