1P A R T

C H A P T E R 1
Colliding Worlds,
1450–1600

C H A P T E R 2
American Experiments,
1518–1700

2

Transformations
of North America
1450–1700

In 1450, North America, Europe, and Africa were each home to complex

societies  with  their  own  distinctive  cultures.  But  their  histories  were

about to collide, bringing vast changes to all three continents. European

voyagers sailing in the wake of Christopher Columbus set in motion one

of the most momentous developments in world history: sustained contact

among Native Americans, Europeans, and Africans in dozens of distinct

colonial settings. Before the arrival of Europeans, a wide range of com-

plex  Native  American  societies  claimed  the  continent  as  their  own.

Although colonization brought profound change, it did not erase what

had come before because Native American societies interacted with colo-

nizers from the beginning. They shaped colonial enterprise in important

ways, enabling some forms of colonization while preventing others.

Native Americans, Europeans, and Africans were surprisingly similar

in  many  ways,  though  the  differences  among  them  were  important  as

well.  Their  distinctive  ideas  about  gods  and  the  spirit  world  informed

their  political  systems  and  animated  their  approaches  to  trade  and

warfare. Whether they met in peace or war  —  or whether peaceful inter-

actions  quickly  turned  violent  —  Native  Americans,  Europeans,  and

Africans viewed one another through lenses that were shaped by these

ideas.

In Part 1, we compare Native American, European, and African soci-

eties on the eve of colonization and then explore how Europeans experi-

mented with various models of colonization in the first two centuries of

sustained transatlantic contacts. The story in Chapters 1 and 2 addresses

three main developments that are central to this period:

