Native American Diversity
and Complexity

Colonial Settlement and the
Columbian Exchange

Popular culture can lead us to think of Native American
societies as being substantially the same everywhere in
North America: they were organized into tribes, with
few material possessions and primitive beliefs and
cultures, and reliant mostly on hunting for their
subsistence. This impression distorts a much more
complicated picture. Native American political orga-
nization ran the gamut from vast, complex imperial
states to kin-based bands of hunters and gatherers.
Patterns of political organization varied widely, and
the familiar label of tribe does more to obscure than
to clarify their workings. Native Americans’ economic
and social systems were adapted to the ecosystems
they inhabited. Many were extremely productive
farmers, some hunted bison and deer, while others
were expert salmon ﬁshermen who plied coastal
waters in large oceangoing boats. Native American
religions and cultures also varied widely, though they
shared some broad characteristics.

These variations in Native American societies shaped
colonial enterprise. Europeans conquered and coopted
Native American empires with relative ease, but smaller
and more decentralized polities were harder to exploit.
Mobile hunter-gatherers appeared politically amor-
phous, but they became especially formidable
opponents of colonial expansion.

European colonization triggered a series of sweeping
changes that historians have labeled the “Columbian
Exchange.” At the same time that people crossed the
Atlantic in large numbers, so too did plants, animals,
and germs. Old World grains like wheat and barley
were planted in the Americas for the ﬁrst time, and
weeds like dandelions were carried across the ocean
as well. Potatoes, maize (corn), and tomatoes, among
other foods, crossed the Atlantic in the other direction
and transformed dietary practices in Asia as well as
Europe. Native Americans domesticated very few
animals; the Columbian Exchange introduced horses,
pigs, cattle, and a variety of other creatures to the
American landscape. Germs also made the voyage,
especially the deadly pathogens that had so disor-
dered life in Europe in the centuries prior to
colonization. Smallpox, inﬂuenza, and bubonic
plague, among others, took an enormous toll
on Native American populations. Inanimate materi-
als made the voyage as well: enough gold and silver
traveled from the Americas to Europe and Asia to
transform the world’s economies, intensifying com-
petition and empire building in Europe.

Old World diseases devastated Native American
peoples.  On average, they lost ninety percent of their
numbers over the ﬁrst century of contact, forcing them
to cope with European and African newcomers in a
weakened and vulnerable state.

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

3

