Transformations of
North America
1450–1700

Thematic Understanding

This timeline arranges some of the important

events of this period into themes. Look at

the entries for “Ideas, Beliefs, and Culture”

from 1450 to 1700. How did the Protestant

Reformation and the response of the Catholic

Church influence the colonization of the

Americas in these years? In the realm of

“Work, Exchange, and Technology,” how did

colonial economies evolve, and what roles

did Native American and African labor play

in them?  >

Experimentation
and Transformation

The collisions of American, European, and African
worlds challenged the beliefs and practices of all
three groups. Colonization was, above all, a long
and tortured process of experimentation. Over time,
Europeans carved out three distinct types of colonies
in the Americas, each shaped by the constraints and
opportunities presented by American landscapes and
peoples. Where Native American societies were organized
into densely settled empires, Europeans conquered the
ruling class and established tribute-based empires of
their own. In tropical and subtropical settings, colo-
nizers created plantation societies that demanded
large, imported labor forces — a need that was met
through the African slave trade. And in the temperate
regions of the mainland North America, where neither
the landscape nor the native population yielded easy
wealth, European colonists came in large numbers
hoping to create familiar societies in unfamiliar set-
tings.

Everywhere in the Americas, core beliefs and world-
views were shaken by contact with radically unfamiliar
peoples. Native Americans and Africans struggled to
maintain autonomy in their relations with colonizers,
while Europeans labored to understand — and proﬁt
from — their relations with nonwhite peoples. These
transformations are the subject of Part 1.

4

