1

C H A P T E R

THE NATIVE AMERICAN
EXPERIENCE

The First Americans

American Empires

Chiefdoms and Confederacies

Patterns of Trade

Sacred Power

WESTERN EUROPE:
THE EDGE OF THE OLD
WORLD

Hierarchy and Authority

Peasant Society

Expanding Trade Networks

Myths, Religions, and Holy

Warriors

WEST AND CENTRAL
AFRICA: ORIGINS OF THE
ATLANTIC SLAVE TRADE

Empires, Kingdoms, and

Ministates

Trans-Saharan and Coastal Trade

The Spirit World

EXPLORATION AND
CONQUEST

Portuguese Expansion

The African Slave Trade

Sixteenth-Century Incursions

6

Colliding Worlds
1450–1600

In April 1493, a Genoese sailor of humble

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
How did the political, economic, and
religious  systems  of  Native  Ameri-
cans,  Europeans,  and  Africans  com-
pare, and how did things change as
a result of contacts among them?

origins appeared at the court of Queen
Isabella of Castile and King Ferdinand
of Aragon along with six Caribbean natives,
numerous colorful parrots, and “samples of
ﬁnest  gold,  and  many  other  things  never
before seen or heard tell of in Spain.” The
sailor was Christopher Columbus, just returned from his ﬁrst voyage into the Atlantic.
He  and  his  party  entered  Barcelona’s  fortress  in  a  solemn  procession.  The  monarchs
stood to greet Columbus; he knelt to kiss their hands. They talked for an hour and then
adjourned to the royal chapel for a ceremony of thanksgiving. Columbus, now bearing
the ofﬁcial title Admiral of the Ocean Sea, remained at court for more than a month.
The  highlight  of  his  stay  was  the  baptism  of  the  six  natives,  whom  Columbus  called
Indians because he mistakenly believed he had sailed westward all the way to Asia.

(cid:116)

In  the  spring  of  1540,  the  Spanish  explorer  Hernando  de  Soto  met  the  Lady  of
Cofachiqui,  ruler  of  a  large  Native  American  province  in  present-day  South  Carolina.
Though  an epidemic had carried away many of her people, the lady of the province
offered the Spanish expedition as much corn, and as many pearls, as it could carry. As
she spoke to de Soto, she unwound “a great rope of pearls as large as hazelnuts” and
handed them to the Spaniard; in return he gave her a gold ring set with a ruby. De Soto
and  his  men  then  visited  the  temples  of  Cofachiqui,  which  were  guarded  by  carved
statues and held storehouses of weapons and chest upon chest of pearls. After loading
their horses with corn and pearls, they continued on their way.

(cid:116)

A Portuguese traveler named Duarte Lopez visited the African kingdom of Kongo in
1578. “The men and women are black,” he reported, “some approaching olive colour,
with black curly hair, and others with red. The men are of middle height, and, excepting
the black skin, are like the Portuguese.” The royal city of Kongo sat on a high plain that
was “entirely cultivated,” with a population of more than 100,000. The city included a
separate commercial district, a mile around, where Portuguese traders acquired ivory,
wax, honey, palm oil, and slaves from the Kongolese.

(cid:116)

Three glimpses of three lost worlds. Soon these peoples would be transforming one
another’s societies, often through conﬂict and exploitation. But at the moment they ﬁrst
met, Europeans, Native Americans, and Africans stood on roughly equal terms. Even a
hundred years after Columbus’s discovery of the Americas, no one could have foreseen
the shape that their interactions would take in the generations to come. To begin, we
need to understand the three worlds as distinct places, each home to unique societies
and cultures.

