8

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

The Native American
Experience
When  Europeans  arrived,  perhaps  60  million  people
occupied the Americas, 7 million of whom lived north
of Mexico. In Mesoamerica (present-day Mexico and
Guatemala)  and  the  Andes,  empires  that  rivaled  the
greatest  civilizations  in world  history  ruled  over  mil-
lions of people. At the other end of the political spec-
trum, hunters and gatherers were organized into kin-
based  bands.  Between  these  extremes,  semisedentary
societies  planted  and  tended  crops  in  the  spring  and
summer, fished and hunted, made war, and conducted
trade.  Though  we  often  see  this  spectrum  as  a  hier-
archy  in  which  the  empires  are  most  impressive  and
important  while  hunter-gatherers  deserve  scarcely  a
mention, this bias toward civilizations that left behind
monumental architecture and spawned powerful rul-
ing classes is misplaced. Regardless of size or political
complexity,  the  energies  and  innovations  of  Native
American  societies  everywhere  profoundly  trans-
formed American landscapes. To be fully understood,
the  Americas  must  be  treated  in  all  their  complexity,
with  an  appreciation  for  their  diverse  societies  and
cultures.

The First Americans
Archaeologists  believe  that  migrants  from  Asia
crossed  a  100-mile-wide  land  bridge  connecting
Siberia and Alaska during the last Ice Age sometime
between  13,000  and  3000  b.c.  and  thus  became  the
first  Americans.  The  first  wave  of  this  migratory
stream from Asia lasted from about fifteen thousand
to nine thousand years ago. Then the glaciers melted,
and  the  rising  ocean  submerged  the  land  bridge
beneath  the  Bering  Strait  (Map  1.1).  Around  eight
thousand  years  ago,  a  second  movement  of  peoples,
traveling  by  water  across  the  same  narrow  strait,
brought the ancestors of the Navajos and the Apaches
to North America. The forebears of the Aleut and Inuit
peoples, the “Eskimos,” came in a third wave around
five thousand years ago. Then, for three hundred gen-
erations, the peoples of the Western Hemisphere were
largely cut off from the rest of the world.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors allowed
for the development of
empires in central Mexico
and the Andes?

During this long era, migrants
dispersed through the continents
as they hunted and gathered avail-
able  resources.  The  predominant
flow was southward, and the dens-
est  populations  developed
in

central  Mexico — home  to  some  20  million  people
at the time of first contact with Europeans — and the
Andes Mountains, with a population of perhaps 12 mil-
lion. In North America, a secondary trickle of migra-
tion pushed eastward, across the Rockies and into the
Mississippi Valley and the eastern woodlands.

Around 6000 b.c., some Native American peoples
in present-day Mexico and Peru began raising domes-
ticated  crops.  Mesoamericans  cultivated  maize  into  a
nutritious  plant  with  a  higher  yield  per  acre  than
wheat,  barley,  or  rye,  the  staple  cereals  of  Europe.  In
Peru they also bred the potato, a  root crop of unsur-
passed nutritional value. The resulting agricultural sur-
pluses  encouraged  population  growth  and  laid  the
foundation for wealthy, urban societies in Mexico and
Peru, and later in the Mississippi Valley and the south-
eastern woodlands of North America (Map 1.2).

American Empires
In Mesoamerica and the Andes, the two great empires
of the Americas — the Aztecs and Incas — dominated
the landscape. Dense populations, productive agricul-
ture, and an aggressive bureaucratic state were the keys
to  their  power.  Each  had  an  impressive  capital  city.
Tenochtitlán,  established  in  1325  at  the  center  of  the
Aztec Empire, had at its height around 1500 a popula-
tion of about 250,000, at a time when the European cit-
ies of London and Seville each had perhaps 50,000. The
Aztec  state  controlled  the  fertile  valleys  in  the  high-
lands of Mexico, and Aztec merchants forged trading
routes that crisscrossed the empire. Trade, along with
tribute  demanded  from  subject  peoples  (comparable
to  taxes  in  Europe),  brought  gold,  textiles,  turquoise,
obsidian,
to
Tenochtitlán.  The  Europeans  who  first  encountered
this city in 1519 marveled at the city’s wealth and beauty.
“Some of the soldiers among us who had been in many
parts of the world,” wrote Spanish conquistador Bernal
Díaz del Castillo, “in Constantinople, and all over Italy,
and in Rome, said that [they had never seen] so large a
market place and so full of people, and so well regu-
lated and arranged” (see American Voices, p. 32).

feathers,  and  cacao

tropical  bird

Ruled  by  priests  and  warrior-nobles,  the  Aztecs
subjugated most of central Mexico. Captured enemies
were brought to the capital, where Aztec priests bru-
tally sacrificed thousands of them. The Aztecs believed
that these ritual murders sustained the cosmos, ensur-
ing fertile fields and the daily return of the sun.

Cuzco, the Inca capital located more than 11,000 feet
above sea level, had perhaps 60,000 residents. A dense
network  of  roads,  storehouses,  and  administrative

