CHAPTER 1

  Colliding Worlds, 1450–1600

9

Using a global projection, the cartographer has
placed North America in the center of  the map,
but parts of four other continents appear.

A S I A

A

I

R

JAPAN
K
U
RIL

IS.

E

B

I

S

25,000–12,000 B.C.
Land bridge open

BERINGIA

Bering
Sea

ALASKA

120°E

E
°
0
6
1

160°W

S c a n d i n a v i a n
i c e   s h e e t

E U R O P E

80°E

40°E

Pack ice

0
°

°W
40

G r e e n l a n d
i c e   s h e e t

80°W

120°W

Evidence indicates that peoples came
from Asia to the Americas during the
Ice Age, when the sea level was much lower
than today and a large land bridge-labeled
Beringia on the map-connected the continents.

°N
0
6

A
F
R
I
C
A

N
°
0
4

N O R T H
A M E R I C A

La u r e n t ide ice sheet

As scholars learn more about the
advances and retreats of the ice sheets,
the camping sites of the migrating
peoples, and changes in vegetation zones,
a more complete picture of the peopling
of the Americas will emerge.

ATL A N T I C
O CEAN

°N
0
2

°
0

line

t
s
a
o
c
age

-
e
c
i
e
t
a

proxim

p
a

FLORIDA

Gulf of
Mexico

Caribbean Sea

SOUTH
AMERICA

C
o
r
d
i
l
l
e
r
a
n
i
c
e
s
h
e
e
t

PACIFIC OCEA N

Current scholarship holds that the migrating
peoples initially traveled on a narrow strip of
ice-free land along the Pacific coast. As the
area between the Cordilleran and Laurentide
ice sheets lost its cover of ice, probably between
14,000 and 12,000 B.C., migrants may also have
used the  inland routes from present-day
Alaska to the American interior.

N

E

W

S

R
O
C
K
Y
M
O
U
N
T
A
I
N
S

Ice sheets, c. 16,000 B.C.
Ice sheets, c. 12,000 B.C.

Vegetation zones:

Tundra
Conifer forest
Deciduous forest
Prairie
Desert
Migration route

(after Tanner)

Many groups, accustomed to
living at the ocean’s edge,
probably continued along
this route, pushing ever
southward into South America.

0

0

500

1,000 miles

500 1,000 kilometers

MAP 1.1
The Ice Age and the Settling of the Americas

Some sixteen thousand years ago, a sheet of ice covered much of Europe and North America. The
ice lowered the level of the world’s oceans, which created a broad bridge of land between Siberia
and Alaska. Using that land bridge, hunting peoples from Asia migrated to North America as they
pursued woolly mammoths and other large game animals and sought ice-free habitats. By 10,000
B.C., the descendants of these migrant peoples had moved south to present-day Florida and central
Mexico. In time, they would settle as far south as the tip of South America and as far east as the
Atlantic coast of North America.

