10

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

ALEUT

ARCTIC O CEA N

INUIT

INUIT

DENE

TLINGIT

DOGRIB

INUIT

INUIT

NASKAPI

MONTAGNAIS

BEOTHUK

MICMAC

ABENAKI

SAUK

IOWA

POTAWATOMI

LENNI
LENAPE

ILLINOIS

SHAWNEE

IROQUOIS

PASSAMAQUODDY
WAMPANOAG
MOHEGAN
NARRAGANSETT

PEQUOT
SUSQUEHANNOCK

MUNSEE
DELAWARE

POWHATAN

TUSCARORA

CHEROKEE

CHICKASAW

YAMASEE
CREEK

TIMUCUA

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

CALUSA

SEMINOLE

LUCAYO

CIBONEY SUB TAINO

TAINO

CHOCTAW

Gulf of
Mex ico

MAYA

C a r i b b e a n   S e a

MIXTEC

ZAPOTEC

MISKITO

CUNA

GUAYMI

KOOTENAI

ASSINIBOINE

CREE

ALGONQUIAN

HAIDA

TSIMSHIAN

KWAKIUTL

SALISH

NOOTKA

CHIPEWYAN

CREE

BLACKFEET

NEZ PERCÉ

CROW

OJIBWA

HIDATSA
MANDAN

CHEYENNE

SIOUX

NORTHERN
PAIUTE

SHOSHONE

PAWNEE

POMO

SOUTHERN
PAIUTE

Y
O
K
UT
CHUMASH

PAPAGO

ARAPAHO

UTE

NAVAJO

S
O
L
B
E
U
P
APACHE

TEWAS

ZUÑIACOMAHOPIETC.

KIOWA

CADDO

COMANCHE

P A C I F I C
O C E A N

N

E

W

S

COCHIMI

PIMA

COAHUILTEC

ZACATEC

TOLTEC

NAHUATL
(AZTEC)

Dominant Economic Activity

Agriculture
Hunting-gathering
Fishing-gathering

0

0

500

1,000 miles

500

1,000 kilometers

MAP 1.2
Native American Peoples, 1492

Having learned to live in many environments, Native Americans populated the entire Western
Hemisphere. They created cultures that ranged from centralized empires (the Incas and Aztecs),
to societies that combined farming with hunting, ﬁshing, and gathering (the Iroquois and
Algonquians), to nomadic tribes of hunter-gatherers (the Micmacs and Shoshones). The great
diversity of Native American peoples — in language, tribal identity, and ways of life — and the long-
standing rivalries among neighboring peoples usually prevented them from uniting to resist the
European invaders.

centers stitched together this improbable high-altitude
empire, which ran down the 2,000-mile-long spine of
the  Andes  Mountains.  A  king  claiming  divine  status
ruled the empire through a bureaucracy of nobles. Like
the  Aztecs,  the  empire  consisted  of  subordinate  king-
doms that had been conquered by the Incas, and tribute
flowed from local centers of power to the imperial core.

Chiefdoms and Confederacies
Nothing  on  the  scale  of  the  Aztec  and  Inca  empires
ever developed north of Mexico, but maize agriculture
spread  from  Mesoamerica  across  much  of  North
America beginning around a.d. 1000, laying a founda-
tion for new ways of life there as well.

