CHAPTER 1

  Colliding Worlds, 1450–1600

11

Understanding the Cosmos
of the Aztecs

Using Aztec sources, German
geographers drew this map of
Tenochtitlán in 1524. Recent
scholarship suggests that the
Aztecs viewed their city as a
cosmic linchpin, where the human
world brushed up against the
divine. In the center of the city
stand two elevated temples that
represent Coatepec, the Serpent
Mountain and the mythic birth -
place of the Aztecs’ tribal god
Huitzilopochtli. Priests sacriﬁced
thousands of men and women
here, a ritual the Aztecs believed
transformed the temples into the
Sacred Mountain and sustained
the cosmos. Bildarchiv Preussischer
Kulturbesitz/Art Resource, NY.

The Mississippi Valley  The spread of maize to the
Mississippi  River  Valley  around  a.d.  1000  led  to  the
development of a large-scale northern Native American
culture.  The  older  Adena  and  Hopewell  cultures  had
already  introduced  moundbuilding  and  distinctive
pottery  styles  to  the  region.  Now  residents  of  the
Mississippi River Valley experienced the greater urban
density  and  more  complex  social  organization  that
agriculture encouraged.

The  city  of  Cahokia,  in  the  fertile  bottomlands
along  the  Mississippi  River,  emerged  around  1000  as
the foremost center of the new Mississippian culture.
At  its  peak,  Cahokia’s  population  exceeded  10,000;
smaller satellite communities brought the region’s pop-
ulation to 20,000 to 30,000. In an area of 6 square miles,
archaeologists have found 120 mounds of varying size,

shape,  and  function.  Some  contain  extensive  burials;
others, known as platform mounds, were used as bases
for  ceremonial  buildings  or  rulers’  homes.  Cahokia
had a powerful ruling class and a priesthood that wor-
shipped the sun. After peaking in size around 1350, it
declined rapidly. Scholars speculate that its decline was
caused  by  an  era  of  ruinous  warfare,  exacerbated  by
environmental factors that made the site less habitable.
It had been abandoned by the time Europeans arrived
in the area.

Mississippian  culture  endured,  however,  and  was
still in evidence throughout much of the Southeast at
the time of first contact with Europeans. The Lady of
Cofachiqui encountered by Hernando de Soto in 1540
ruled over a Mississippian community, and others dot-
ted the landscape between the Carolinas and the lower

