12

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

Mississippi River. In Florida, sixteenth-century Spanish
explorers  encountered  the  Apalachee  Indians,  who
occupied a network of towns built around mounds and
fields of maize.

Eastern Woodlands
In the eastern woodlands, the
Mississippian-influenced  peoples  of  the  Southeast
interacted with other groups, many of whom adopted
maize agriculture but did not otherwise display Mis-
siss ippian characteristics. To the north, Algonquian and
Iroquoian speakers shared related languages and life-
ways but were divided into dozens of distinct societies.
Most  occupied  villages  built  around  fields  of  maize,
beans, and squash during the summer months; at other
times of the year, they dispersed in smaller groups to
hunt,  fish,  and  gather.  Throughout  the  eastern  wood-
lands,  as  in  most  of  North  America,  women  tended
crops, gathered plants, and oversaw affairs within the
community, while men were responsible for activities
beyond it, especially hunting, fishing, and warfare.

In  this  densely  forested  region,  Indians  regularly
set fires — in New England, twice a year, in spring and
fall — to clear away underbrush, open fields, and make
it easier to hunt big game. The catastrophic population
decline accompanying European colonization quickly
put an end to seasonal burning, but in the years before
Europeans  arrived  in  North  America  bison  roamed
east  as  far  as  modern-day  New  York  and  Georgia.
Early  European  colonists  remarked  upon  landscapes
that  “resemble[d]  a  stately  Parke,”  where  men  could
ride among widely spaced trees on horseback and even
a  “large  army”  could  pass  unimpeded  (America
Compared, p. 14).

Algonquian  and  Iroquoian  peoples  had  no  single
style  of  political  organization.  Many  were  chiefdoms,
with  one  individual  claiming  preeminent  power  in  a
community.  Some  were  paramount  chiefdoms,  in
which  numerous  communities  with  their  own  local
chiefs banded together under a single, more powerful
ruler.  For  example,  the  Powhatan  Chiefdom,  which

The Great Serpent Mound
Scholars long believed that this mound was the work of the Adena peoples (500 B.C.–A.D. 200) because of its
proximity to an Adena burial site in present-day southern Ohio. Recent research places the mound at a much
later date (A.D. 950–1200) and, because of the serpent imagery, ties it to the Fort Ancient culture, which is
closely related to the Mississippian complex. The head of the serpent is aligned with the sunset of the
summer solstice (June 20 or 21 in the Northern Hemisphere), an event of great religious signiﬁcance to a
sun-worshipping culture. © Bettmann/Corbis.

