CHAPTER 1

  Colliding Worlds, 1450–1600

13

The Kincaid Site

Located on the north bank of the Ohio River 140 miles from Cahokia, the Kincaid site was a Mississippian
town from c. A.D. 1050 to 1450. It contains at least nineteen mounds topped by large buildings thought to
have been temples or council houses. Now a state historic site in Illinois, it has been studied by anthropolo-
gists and archaeologists since the 1930s. Artist Herb Roe depicts the town as it may have looked at its peak.
Herb Roe, Chromesun Productions.

dominated the Chesapeake Bay region, embraced more
than  thirty  subordinate  chiefdoms,  and  some  20,000
people, by the time Englishmen established the colony
of  Virginia  in  Powhatan  territory.  Powhatan  himself,
according  to  the  English  colonist  John  Smith,  was
attended by “a guard of 40 or 50 of the tallest men his
Country affords.”

Elsewhere,  especially  in  the  Mid-Atlantic  region,
the  power  of  chiefs  was  strictly  local.  Along  the
Delaware  and  Hudson  rivers,  Lenni  Lenape  (or
Delaware)  and  Munsee  Indians  lived  in  small,  inde-
pendent  communities  without  overarching  political
organizations.  Early  European  maps  of  this  region
show a landscape dotted with a bewildering profusion
of  Indian  names.  European  colonization  would  soon

drive many of these groups into oblivion and force sur-
vivors to coalesce into larger groups.

Some  Native  American  groups  were  not  chief-
doms at all, but instead granted political authority to
councils of sachems, or leaders. This was the case with
the  Iroquois  Confederacy.  Sometime  shortly  before
the  arrival  of  Europeans,  probably  around  1500,  five
nations  occupying  the  region  between  the  Hudson
River  and  Lake  Erie — the  Mohawks,  Oneidas,
Onondagas, Cayugas, and Senecas — banded together
to form the Iroquois.

These groups had been fighting among themselves
for years, caught in a destructive cycle of wars of retri-
bution. Then, according to Iroquois legend, a Mohawk
man  named  Hiawatha  lost  his  family  in  one  of  these

