wars. Stricken by grief, he met a spirit who taught him
a series of condolence rituals. He returned to his people
preaching  a  new  gospel  of  peace  and  power,  and  the
condolence  rituals  he  taught  became  the  foundation
for the Iroquois Confederacy.

Once  bound  by  these  rituals,  the  Five  Nations
began acting together as a political confederacy. They
avoided violence among themselves and became one of
the  most  powerful  Native  American  groups  in  the
Northeast.  The  Iroquois  did  not  recognize  chiefs;
instead,  councils  of  sachems  made  decisions.  These
were  matriarchal  societies,  with  power  inherited
through female lines of authority. Women were influ-
ential in local councils, though men served as sachems,
made war, and conducted diplomacy.

Along the southern coast of the region that would
soon  be  called  New  England,  a  dense  network  of
powerful  chiefdoms — including  the  Narragansetts,
Wampanoags,  Mohegans,  Pequots,  and  others —
competed  for  resources  and  dominance.  When  the
Dutch  and  English  arrived,  they  were  able  to  exploit
these  rivalries  and  play  Indian  groups  against  one
another. Farther north, in northern New England and
much of present-day Canada, the short growing season
and thin, rocky soil were inhospitable to maize agricul-
ture. Here the native peoples were hunters and gather-
ers and therefore had smaller and more mobile com-
munities, though they were no less complex than their
agriculturally oriented cousins.

The Great Lakes  To the west, Algonquian-speaking
peoples dominated the Great Lakes. The tribal groups
recognized  by  Europeans  in  this  region  included  the
Ottawas,  Ojibwas,  and  Potawatomis.  But  collectively
they  thought  of  themselves  as  a  single  people:  the
Anishinaabe. Clan identities — beaver, otter, sturgeon,
deer, and others — crosscut tribal affiliations and were
in  some  ways  more  fundamental.  The  result  was  a
social landscape that could be bewildering to outsiders.
Here lived, one French official remarked, “an infinity of
undiscovered nations.”

The extensive network of lakes and rivers, and the
use  of  birchbark  canoes,  made  Great  Lakes  peoples
especially mobile. “They seem to have as many abodes
as the year has seasons,” wrote one observer. They trav-
eled long distances to hunt and fish, to trade, or to join
in important ceremonies or military alliances. Groups
negotiated access to resources and travel routes. Instead
of a map with clearly delineated tribal territories, it is
best  to  imagine  the  Great  Lakes  as  a  porous  region,
where “political power and social identity took on mul-
tiple forms,” as one scholar has written.

CHAPTER 1

  Colliding Worlds, 1450–1600

15

The Great Plains and Rockies  Farther west lies the
vast,  arid  steppe  region  known  as  the  Great  Plains,
which  was  dominated  by  the  hunting  and  gathering
activities of small, dispersed groups. The geopolitics of
the  Plains  Indians  was  transformed  by  a  European
import — the  horse — long  before  Europeans  them-
selves arrived. Livestock was introduced in the Spanish
colony  of  New  Mexico  in  the  late  sixteenth  century,
and from there horses gradually dispersed across the
plains.  Bison  hunters  who  had  previously  relied  on
stealth became much more successful on horseback.

Indians  on  horseback  were  also  more  formidable
opponents than their counterparts on foot, and some
Plains  peoples  leveraged  their  control  of  horses  to
gain  power  over  their  neigh-
bors.  The  Comanches  were  a
small  Shoshonean  band  on  the
northern  plains  that  migrated
south  in  pursuit  of  horses.  They
became  expert  raiders,  captur-
ing  people  and  horses  alike  and
trading  them  for  weapons,  food,
clothing,  and  other  necessities.
Eventually they controlled a vast territory. From their
humble origins, their skill in making war on horseback
made the Comanches one of the region’s most formi-
dable peoples.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did landscape,
climate, and resources
inﬂuence the develop-
ment of Native American
societies?

Similarly, horses allowed the Sioux, a confederation
of seven distinct peoples who originated in present-day
Minnesota, to move west and dominate a vast territory
ranging from the Mississippi River to the Black Hills.
The Crow Indians moved from the Missouri River to
the eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains, where they
became nomadic bison hunters. Beginning in the mid-
eighteenth  century,  they  became  horse  breeders  and
traders as well.

In  some  places,

farming  communities  were
embedded within the much wider geographical range
of  hunter-gatherers.  Thus  the  Hidatsa  and  Mandan
Indians  maintained  settled  agricultural  villages  along
the Missouri River, while the more mobile Sioux dom-
inated  the  region  around  them.  Similarly,  the  Caddo
Indians, who lived on the edge of the southern plains,
inhabited  agricultural  communities  that  were  like
islands in a sea of more mobile peoples.

Three  broad  swaths  of  Numic-speaking  peoples
occupied  the  Great  Basin  that  separated  the  Rockies
from  the  Sierra  Mountains:  Bannocks  and  Northern
Paiutes  in  the  north,  Shoshones  in  the  central  basin,
and Utes and Southern Paiutes in the south. Resources
were  varied  and  spread  thin  on  the  land.  Kin-based
bands traveled great distances to hunt bison along the

