16

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

Yellowstone  River  (where  they  shared  territory  with
the Crows) and bighorn sheep in high altitudes, to fish
for salmon, and to gather pine nuts when they were in
season.  Throughout  the  Great  Basin,  some  groups
adopted horses and became relatively powerful, while
others remained foot-borne and impoverished in com-
parison with their more mobile neighbors.

The Arid Southwest
In the part of North America
that  appears  to  be  most  hostile  to  agriculture —
the  canyon-laced  country  of  the  arid  Southwest —
surprisingly  large  farming  settlements  developed.
Anasazi peoples were growing maize by the first cen-
tury a.d., earlier than anywhere else north of Mexico,
and  Pueblo  cultures  emerged  around  a.d.  600.  By
a.d. 1000, the Hohokams, Mogollons, and Anasazis (all
Pueblo  peoples)  had  developed  irrigation  systems  to
manage  scarce  water,  enabling  them  to  build  sizable
villages and towns of adobe and rock that were often
molded to sheer canyon walls. Chaco Canyon, in mod-
ern  New  Mexico,  supported  a  dozen  large  Anasazi
towns,  while  beyond  the  canyon  a  network  of  roads
tied these settlements together with hundreds of small
Anasazi villages.

Extended droughts and soil exhaustion caused the
abandonment of Chaco Canyon and other large settle-
ments  in  the  Southwest  after  1150,  but  smaller  com-
munities  still  dotted  the  landscape  when  the  first
Europeans arrived. It was the Spanish who called these
groups  Pueblo  Indians:  pueblo  means  “town”  in
Spanish, and the name refers to their distinctive build-
ing  style.  When  Europeans  arrived,  Pueblo  peoples,
including the Acomas, Zuñis, Tewas, and Hopis, were
found  throughout  much  of  modern  New  Mexico,
Arizona, and western Texas.

The  Pacific  Coast  Hunter-gatherers  inhabited  the
Pacific  coast.  Before  the  arrival  of  the  Spanish,
California  was  home  to  more  than  300,000  people,
subdivided into dozens of small, localized groups and
speaking  at  least  a  hundred  distinct  languages.  This
diversity of languages and cultures discouraged inter-
marriage and kept these societies independent. Despite
these  differences,  many  groups  did  share  common
characteristics, including clearly defined social hierar-
chies separating elites from commoners. They gathered
acorns and other nuts and seeds, caught fish and shell-
fish, and hunted game.

The Pacific Northwest also supported a dense pop-
ulation that was divided into many distinct groups who
controlled  small  territories  and  spoke  different  lan-
guages. Their stratified societies were ruled by wealthy
families.  To  maintain  control  of  their  territories,  the
more powerful nations, including the Chinooks, Coast
Salishes, Haidas, and Tlingits, nurtured strong warrior
traditions. They developed sophisticated fishing tech-
nologies and crafted oceangoing dugout canoes, made
from enormous cedar trees, that ranged up to 60 feet
in  length.  Their  distinctive  material  culture  included
large longhouses that were home to dozens of people
and  totem  poles  representing  clan  lineages  or  local
legends.

Patterns of Trade
Expansive  trade  networks  tied  together  regions  and
carried valuable goods hundreds and even thousands
of miles. Trade goods included food and raw materials,
tools,  ritual  artifacts,  and  decorative  goods.  Trade
enriched diets, enhanced economies, and allowed the
powerful to set themselves apart with luxury items.

Anasazi Ladle
Crafted between A.D. 1300 and 1600 and
found in a site in central Arizona, this
Anasazi dipper was coiled and molded by
hand and painted with a geometric motif.
Anasazi pottery is abundant in archaeologi-
cal sites, thanks in part to the Southwest’s
dry climate. Clay vessels and ladles helped
Anasazi peoples handle water — one of
their most precious resources — with care.
National Museum of the American Indian,
Smithsonian Institution.

