CHAPTER 1

  Colliding Worlds, 1450–1600

17

Chilkat Tlingit Bowl

This bowl in the form of a brown bear,
which dates to the mid-nineteenth cen-
tury, is made of alder wood and inlaid
with snail shells. The brown bear is a
Tlingit clan totem. Animal-form bowls like
this one, which express an afﬁnity with
nonhuman creatures, are a common
feature of Tlingit culture. National Museum
of the American Indian, Smithsonian Institution.

In  areas  where  Indians  specialized  in  a  particular
economic  activity,  regional  trade  networks  allowed
them to share resources. Thus nomadic hunters of the
southern  plains,  including  the  Navajos  and  Apaches,
conducted  annual  trade  fairs  with  Pueblo  farmers,
exchanging hides and meat for maize, pottery, and cot-
ton  blankets.  Similar  patterns  of  exchange  occurred
throughout  the  Great  Plains,  wherever  hunters  and
farmers coexisted. In some parts of North America, a
regional  trade  in  war  captives  who  were  offered  as
slaves helped to sustain friendly relations among neigh-
boring  groups.  One  such  network  developed  in  the
Upper Mississippi River basin, where Plains Indian cap-
tives were traded, or given as diplomatic gifts, to Ottawas
and other Great Lakes and eastern woodlands peoples.
Across longer distances, rare and valuable objects
traveled through networks that spanned much of the
continent. Great Lakes copper, Rocky Mountain mica,
jasper from Pennsylvania, obsidian from New Mexico
and Wyoming, and pipestone from the Midwest have
all been found in archaeological sites hundreds of miles
from  their  points  of  origin.  Seashells — often  shaped
and polished into beads and other artifacts — traveled
hundreds of miles inland. Grizzly bear claws and eagle
feathers  were  prized,  high-status  objects.  After
European contact, Indian hunters often traveled long
distances to European trading posts to trade for cloth,
iron tools, and weapons.

Within Native American groups, powerful leaders
controlled  a  disproportionate  share  of  wealth  and
redistributed it to prove their generosity and strengthen
their authority. In small, kin-based bands, the strongest
hunters  possessed  the  most  food,  and  sharing  it  was

essential.  In  chiefdoms,  rulers  filled  the  same  role,
often collecting the wealth of a  community and then
redistributing  it  to  their  followers.  Powhatan,  the
powerful  Chesapeake  Bay  chief,  reportedly  collected
nine-tenths  of  the  produce  of  the  communities  he
oversaw — “skins, beads, copper, pearls, deer, turkeys,
wild beasts, and corn” — but then gave much of it back
to  his  subordinates.  His  generosity  was  considered  a
mark of good leadership. In the Pacific Northwest, the
Chinook  word  potlatch  refers  to  periodic  festivals  in
which  wealthy  residents  gave  away  belongings  to
friends, family, and followers.

Sacred Power
Most  Native  North  Americans  were  animists  who
believed that the natural world was suffused with spir-
itual power. They sought to understand the world by
interpreting  dreams  and  visions,  and  their  rituals
appeased guardian spirits that could ensure successful
hunts and other forms of good fortune. Although their
views were subject to countless local variations, certain
patterns were widespread.

Women and men interacted differently with these
spiritual  forces.  In  agricultural  communities,  women
grew crops and maintained hearth, home, and village.
Native American conceptions of female power linked
their bodies’ generative functions with the earth’s fertility,
and rituals like the Green Corn Ceremony — a summer
ritual  of  purification  and  renewal — helped  to  sustain
the life-giving properties of the world around them.

For  men,  spiritual  power  was  invoked  in  hunting
and war. To ensure success in hunting, men took care

