18

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

UNDERSTAND POINTS
OF VIEW
How did Native Americans’
conceptions of the spiritual
world inﬂuence their daily
lives?

not to offend the spirits of the ani-
mals they killed. They performed
rituals before, during, and after a
hunt to acknowledge the power of
those  guardian  spirits,  and  they
believed that, when an animal had
been  killed  properly,  its  spirit
would rise from the earth unharmed. Success in hunt-
ing and prowess in war were both interpreted as signs
of sacred protection and power.

Ideas about war varied widely. War could be fought
for  geopolitical  reasons — to  gain  ground  against  an
enemy — but  for  many  groups,  warfare  was  a  crucial
rite  of  passage  for  young  men,  and  raids  were  con-
ducted to allow warriors to prove themselves in battle.
Motives  for  war  could  be  highly  personal;  war  was
often more like a blood feud between families than a
contest between nations. If a community lost warriors
in battle, it often retaliated by capturing or killing a like
number of warriors in response — a so-called mourn-
ing war. Some captives were adopted into new commu-
nities, while others were enslaved or tortured.

Western Europe: The Edge
of the Old World
In  1450,  Western  Europe  lay  at  the  far  fringe  of  the
Eurasian  and  African  continents.  It  had  neither  the
powerful centralized empires nor the hunter-gatherer
bands and semisedentary societies of the Americas; it
was, instead, a patchwork of roughly equivalent king-
doms, duchies, and republics vying with one another
and struggling to reach out effectively to the rest of the
world.  No  one  would  have  predicted  that  Europeans
would  soon  become  overlords  of  the  Western
Hemisphere.  A  thousand  years  after  the  fall  of  the
Roman  Empire,  Europe’s  populations  still  relied  on
subsistence  agriculture  and  were  never  far  from  the
specter  of  famine.  Moreover,  around  1350,  a  deadly
plague  introduced  from  Central  Asia — the  Black
Death — had  killed  one-third  of  Europe’s  population.
The lives of ordinary people were afflicted by poverty,
disease, and uncertainty, and the future looked as diffi-
cult and dark as the past.

Hierarchy and Authority
In  traditional  hierarchical  societies — American  or
European — authority  came  from  above.  In  Europe,
kings  and  princes  owned  vast  tracts  of  land,  forcibly

conscripted men for military service, and lived off the
peasantry’s labor. Yet monarchs were far from supreme:
local  nobles  also  owned  large  estates  and  controlled
hundreds of peasant families. Collectively, these nobles
challenged  royal  authority  with  both  their  military
power  and  their  legislative  institutions,  such  as  the
French parlements and the English House of Lords.

Just  as  kings  and  nobles  ruled  society,  men  gov-
erned families. These were patriarchies, in which prop-
erty and social identity descended in male family lines.
Rich or poor, the man was the head of the house, his
power  justified  by  the  teachings  of  the  Christian
Church. As one English clergyman put it, “The woman
is a weak creature not embued with like strength and
constancy of mind”; law and custom “subjected her to
the power of man.” Once married, an Englishwoman
assumed  her  husband’s  surname,  submitted  to  his
orders,  and  surrendered  the  right  to  her  property.
When  he  died,  she  received  a  dower,  usually  the  use
during her lifetime of one-third of the family’s land and
goods.

Men also controlled the lives of their children, who
usually worked for their father into their middle or late
twenties.  Then  landowning  peasants  would  give  land
to their sons and dowries to their daughters and choose
marriage  partners  of  appropriate  wealth  and  status.
In  many  regions,  fathers  bestowed  all  their  land  on
their eldest son — a practice known as primogeniture —
forcing many younger children to join the ranks of the
roaming  poor.  Few  men  and  even  fewer  women  had
much personal freedom.

Hierarchy  and  authority  prevailed  in  traditional
European society because of the power held by estab-
lished institutions — nobility, church, and village — and
because,  in  a  violent  and  unpredictable  world,  they
offered ordinary people a measure of security. Carried
by migrants to America, these security-conscious insti-
tutions would shape the character of family and society
well into the eighteenth century.

Peasant Society
In 1450, most Europeans were peasants, farmworkers
who lived in small villages surrounded by fields farmed
cooperatively by different families. On manorial lands,
farming rights were given in exchange for labor on the
lord’s estate, an arrangement that turned peasants into
serfs. Gradually, obligatory manorial services gave way
to paying rent, or, as in France, landownership. Once
freed  from  the  obligation  to  labor  for  their  farming
rights, European farmers began to produce surpluses
and created local market economies.

