CHAPTER 1

  Colliding Worlds, 1450–1600

19

As with Native Americans, the rhythm of life fol-
lowed  the  seasons.  In  March,  villagers  began  the
exhausting work of plowing and then planting wheat,
rye,  and  oats.  During  the  spring,  the  men  sheared
wool, which the women washed and spun into yarn.
In June, peasants cut hay and stored it as winter fodder
for their livestock. During the summer, life was more
relaxed, and families repaired their houses and barns.
Fall brought the harvest, followed by solemn feasts of
thanksgiving  and  riotous  bouts  of  merrymaking.  As
winter  approached,  peasants  slaughtered  excess  live-
stock and salted or smoked the meat. During the cold
months, they threshed grain and wove textiles, visited
friends  and  relatives,  and  celebrated  the  winter  sol-
stice or the birth of Christ. Just before the cycle began
again  in  the  spring,  they  held  carnivals,  celebrating
with  drink  and  dance  the  end  of  the  long  winter
(Figure 1.1).

For most peasants, survival meant constant labor,
and  poverty  corroded  family  relationships.  Mal-
nourished mothers fed their babies sparingly, calling
them  “greedy  and  gluttonous,”  and  many  newborn
girls were “helped to die” so that their brothers would
have enough to eat. Half of all peasant children died
before the age of twenty-one, victims of malnourish-
ment and disease. Many peasants drew on strong reli-
gious beliefs, “counting blessings” and accepting their
harsh existence. Others hoped for a better life. It  was
the  peasants  of  Spain,  Germany,  and  Britain  who
would  supply  the  majority  of  white  migrants  to  the
Western Hemisphere.

Expanding Trade Networks
In the millennium before contact with the Americas,
Western Europe was the barbarian fringe of the civi-
lized world. In the Mediterranean basin, Arab scholars
carried on the legacy of Byzantine
civilization, which had preserved
the  achievements  of  the  Greeks
and Romans in medicine, philos-
ophy,  mathematics,  astronomy,
and  geo graphy,  while  merchants
controlled  trade  in  the  Mediter-
ranean, Africa, and the Near East.
This  control  gave  them  access  to
spices  from  India  and  silks,  magnetic  compasses,
water-powered  mills,  and  mechanical  clocks  from
China.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
In what ways were
the lives of Europeans
similar to and different
from those of Native
Americans?

In the twelfth century, merchants from the Italian
city-states  of  Genoa,  Florence,  Pisa,  and  especially
Venice  began  to  push  their  way  into  the  Arab-
dominated trade routes of the Mediterranean. Trading
in Alexandria, Beirut, and other eastern Mediterranean
ports, they carried the luxuries of Asia into European
markets.  At  its  peak,  Venice  had  a  merchant  fleet  of
more than three thousand ships. This enormously prof-
itable commerce created wealthy merchants, bankers,
and  textile  manufacturers  who  expanded  trade,  lent
vast sums of money, and spurred technological innova-
tion in silk and wool production.

Italian  moneyed  elites  ruled  their  city-states  as
republics, states that had no prince or king but instead

FIGURE 1.1
The Yearly Rhythm of Rural Life and Death

The annual cycle of nature profoundly
affected life in the traditional agricul-
tural world. The death rate soared by 20
percent in February (from viruses) and
September (from ﬂy-borne dysentery).
Summer was the healthiest season, with
the fewest deaths and the most successful
conceptions (as measured by births nine
months later). A value of 100 indicates an
equal number of deaths and conceptions.

Conceptions

Deaths

Winter

Spring

Summer

Fall

120

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

100

80

Dec. Jan. Feb.

Mar.

Apr. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov.

