20

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

Procession in St. Mark’s Square in Venice, 1496

Venice was one of the world’s great trading centers in the ﬁfteenth century. Its merchant houses connected
Europe to Asia and the Middle East, while its complex republican government aroused both admiration and
mistrust. Here, Venetian painter Gentile Bellini (c. 1429–1507) depicts a diplomatic procession celebrating the
League of Venice, a union of European states opposed to French expansion into Italy. Galleria dell ’Accademia,
Venice, Italy/Giraudon/The Bridgeman Art Library.

were governed by merchant coalitions. They celebrated
civic humanism, an ideology that praised public virtue
and service to the state and in time profoundly influ-
enced European and American conceptions of govern-
ment.  They  sponsored  great  artists — Michelangelo,
Leonardo  da  Vinci,  and  others — who  produced  an
unprecedented  flowering  of  genius.  Historians  have
labeled  the  arts  and  learning  associated  with  this
cultural  transformation  from  1300  to  1450  the
Renaissance.

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did the growth of
commerce shift the struc-
ture of power in European
societies?

The economic revolution that began in Italy spread
slowly  to  northern  and  western  Europe.  England’s
principal export was woolen cloth, which was prized in
the  colder  parts  of  the  continent
but  had  less  appeal  in  southern
Europe  and  beyond.  Northern
Europe had its own trade system,
controlled by an alliance of mer-
chant  communities  called  the
Hanseatic League centered on the
Baltic and North seas, which dealt
in timber, furs, wheat and rye, honey, wax, and amber.
As trade picked up in Europe, merchants and arti-
sans  came  to  dominate  its  growing  cities  and  towns.
While the Italian city-states ruled themselves without
having a powerful monarch to contend with, in much
of  Europe  the  power  of  merchants  stood  in  tension

with  that  of  kings  and  nobles.  In  general,  the  rise  of
commerce favored the power of kings at the expense of
the landed nobility. The kings of Western Europe estab-
lished  royal  law  courts  that  gradually  eclipsed  the
manorial  courts  controlled  by  nobles;  they  also  built
bureaucracies that helped them centralize power while
they  forged  alliances  with  merchants  and  urban  arti-
sans. Monarchs allowed merchants to trade through-
out their realms; granted privileges to guilds, or artisan
organizations  that  regulated  trades;  and  safeguarded
commercial transactions, thereby encouraging domes-
tic  manufacturing  and  foreign  trade.  In  return,  they
extracted taxes from towns and loans from merchants
to support their armies and officials.

Myths, Religions, and Holy Warriors
The oldest European religious beliefs drew on a form of
animism  similar  to  that  of  Native  Americans,  which
held  that  the  natural  world — the  sun,  wind,  stones,
animals — was  animated  by  spiritual  forces.  As  in
North  America,  such  beliefs  led  ancient  European
peoples  to  develop  localized  cults  of  knowledge  and
spiritual practice. Wise men and women developed rit-
uals  to  protect  their  communities,  ensure  abundant
harvests, heal illnesses, and bring misfortunes to their
enemies.

