CHAPTER 1

  Colliding Worlds, 1450–1600

21

The pagan traditions of Greece and Rome overlaid
animism with elaborate myths about gods interacting
directly with the affairs of human beings. As the Roman
Empire expanded, it built temples to its gods wherever
it  planted  new  settlements.  Thus  peoples  throughout
Europe, North Africa, and the Near East were exposed
to  the  Roman  pantheon.  Soon  the  teachings  of
Christianity began to flow in these same channels.

The  Rise  of  Christianity  Christianity,  which  grew
out of Jewish monotheism (the belief in one god), held
that Jesus Christ was himself divine. As an institution,
Christianity  benefitted  enormously  from  the  conver-
sion of the  Roman emperor Constantine in a.d. 312.
Prior  to  that  time,  Christians  were  an  underground
sect at odds with the Roman Empire. After Constantine’s
conversion,  Christianity  became  Rome’s  official  reli-
gion, temples were abandoned or remade into churches,
and  noblemen  who  hoped  to  retain  their  influence

converted to the new state religion. For centuries, the
Roman Catholic Church was the great unifying institu-
tion in Western Europe. The pope in Rome headed a
vast  hierarchy  of  cardinals,  bishops,  and  priests.
Catholic theologians preserved Latin, the language of
classical scholarship, and imbued kingship with divine
power.  Christian  dogma  provided  a  common  under-
standing of God and human history, and the authority
of the Church buttressed state institutions. Every vil-
lage had a church, and holy shrines served as points of
contact with the sacred world. Often those shrines had
their  origins  in  older,  animist  practices,  now  largely
forgotten and replaced with Christian ritual.

Christian doctrine penetrated deeply into the every-
day lives of peasants. While animist traditions held that
spiritual forces were alive in the natural world, Christian
priests  taught  that  the  natural  world  was  flawed  and
fallen. Spiritual power came from outside nature, from
a supernatural God who had sent his divine son, Jesus

The Last Judgment, 1467–1471

Death — and their fate in the after-
life — loomed large in the minds of
ﬁfteenth-century Christians, and artists
depicted their hopes and fears in vividly
rendered scenes. In this painting by the
German-Flemish artist Hans Memling
(c. 1433–1494), Christ and his apostles sit
in judgment as the world ends and the
dead rise from their graves. The archangel
Michael weighs the souls of the dead in a
balance to determine their ﬁnal fate:
either eternal life with God in heaven or
everlasting punishment in hell. Erich Lessing/
Art Resource, NY.

