22

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

Christ, into the world to save humanity from its sins.
The Christian Church devised a religious calendar that
transformed animist festivals into holy days. The win-
ter solstice, which had for millennia marked the return
of the sun, became the feast of Christmas.

The Church also taught that Satan, a wicked super-
natural  being,  was  constantly  challenging  God  by
tempting  people  to  sin.  People  who  spread  here-
sies — doctrines that were inconsistent with the teach-
ings of the Church — were seen as the tools of Satan,
and suppressing false doctrines became an obligation
of Christian rulers.

The  Crusades
In  their  work  suppressing  false
doctrines, Christian rulers were also obliged to com-
bat  Islam,  the  religion  whose  followers  considered
Muhammad  to  be  God’s  last  prophet.  Islam’s  reach
expanded until it threatened European Christendom.
Following  the  death  of  Muhammad  in  a.d.  632,  the
newly  converted  Arab  peoples  of  North  Africa  used
force and fervor to spread the Muslim faith into sub-
Saharan Africa, India, and Indonesia, as  well as deep
into Spain and the Balkan regions of Europe. Between
a.d.  1096  and  1291,  Christian  armies  undertook  a
series  of  Crusades  to  reverse  the  Muslim  advance  in
Europe and win back the holy lands where Christ had
lived. Under the banner of the pope and led by Europe’s
Christian  monarchs,  crusading  armies  aroused  great
waves of popular piety as they marched off to combat.
New orders of knights, like the Knights Templar and
the Teutonic Knights, were created to support them.

The  crusaders  had  some  military  successes,  but
their most profound impact was on European society.
Religious warfare intensified Europe’s Christian iden-
tity  and  prompted  the  persecution  of  Jews  and  their
from  many  European  countries.  The
expulsion
Crusades also introduced Western European merchants
to the trade routes that stretched from Constantinople
to  China  along  the  Silk  Road  and  from  the  Medi-
terranean Sea through the Persian Gulf to the Indian
Ocean. And crusaders encountered sugar for the first
time.  Returning  soldiers  brought  it  back  from  the
Middle East, and as Europeans began to conquer terri-
tory in the eastern Mediterranean, they experimented
with raising it themselves. These early experiments with
sugar  would  have  a  profound
impact  on  European  enterprise
in  the  Americas — and  European
involvement  with  the  African
slave  trade — in  the  centuries  to
come.  By  1450,  Western  Europe
remained  relatively  isolated  from

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did the growing
inﬂuence of the Christian
Church affect events in
Europe?

the centers of civilization in Eurasia and Africa, but the
Crusades and the rise of Italian merchant houses had
introduced it to a wider world.

The  Reformation
In  1517,  Martin  Luther,  a  Ger-
man monk and professor at the university in Witten-
berg,  took  up  the  cause  of  reform  in  the  Catholic
Church.  Luther’s  Ninety-five  Theses  condemned  the
Church  for  many  corrupt  practices.  More  radically,
Luther downplayed the role of the clergy as mediators
between  God  and  believers  and  said  that  Christians
must look to the Bible, not to the Church, as the ulti-
mate authority in matters of faith. So that every literate
German could read the Bible, previously available only
in Latin, Luther translated it into German.

Meanwhile, in Geneva, Switzerland, French theolo-
gian  John  Calvin  established  a  rigorous  Protestant
regime. Even more than Luther, Calvin stressed human
weakness and God’s omnipotence. His Institutes of the
Christian Religion (1536) depicted God as an absolute
sovereign. Calvin preached the doctrine of predestina-
tion, the idea that God chooses certain people for sal-
vation  before  they  are  born  and  condemns  the  rest
to  eternal  damnation.  In  Geneva,  he  set  up  a  model
Christian community and placed spiritual authority in
ministers who ruled the city, prohibiting frivolity and
luxury.  “We  know,”  wrote  Calvin,  “that  man  is  of  so
perverse  and  crooked  a  nature,  that  everyone  would
scratch out his neighbor’s eyes if there were no bridle to
hold  them  in.”  Calvin’s  authoritarian  doctrine  won
converts  all  over  Europe,  including  the  Puritans  in
Scotland and England.

Luther’s  criticisms  triggered  a  war  between  the
Holy  Roman  Empire  and  the  northern  principalities
in  Germany,  and  soon  the  controversy  between  the
Roman  Catholic  Church  and  radical  reformers  like
Luther and Calvin spread throughout much of Western
Europe.  The  Protestant  Reformation,  as  this  move-
ment  came  to  be  called,  triggered  a  Counter-
Reformation  in  the  Catholic  Church  that  sought
change  from  within  and  created  new  monastic  and
missionary  orders,  including  the  Jesuits  (founded  in
1540), who  saw  themselves  as  soldiers  of  Christ. The
competition between these divergent Christian tradi-
tions did much to shape European colonization of the
Americas. Roman Catholic powers — Spain, Portugal,
and France — sought to win souls in the Americas for
the  Church,  while  Protestant  nations — England  and
the Netherlands — viewed the Catholic Church as cor-
rupt  and  exploitative  and  hoped  instead  to  create
godly  communities  attuned  to  the  true  gospel  of
Christianity.

