West and Central Africa:
Origins of the Atlantic
Slave Trade
Homo sapiens originated in Africa. Numerous civiliza-
tions had already risen and fallen there, and contacts
with the Near East and the Mediterranean were millen-
nia old, when Western Europeans began sailing down
its  Atlantic  coast.  Home  to  perhaps  100  million  in
1400,  Africa  was  divided  by  the  vast  expanse  of  the
Sahara. North Africa bordered on the Mediterranean,
and its peoples fell under the domination of Christian
Byzantium  until  the  seventh  century,  when  Muslim
conquests brought the region under Islamic influence.
In  its  coastal  seaports,  the  merchandise  of  Asia,  the
Near East, Africa, and Europe converged. South of the
Sahara, by contrast, the societies of West and Central
Africa  bordering  on  the  Atlantic  were  relatively  iso-
lated. After 1400, that would quickly change.

Empires, Kingdoms, and Ministates
West Africa — the part of the continent that bulges into
the Atlantic — can be visualized as a broad horizontal
swath  divided  into  three  climatic  zones.  The  Sahel  is
the mostly flat, semiarid zone immediately south of the
Sahara.  Below  it  lies  the  savanna,  a  grassland  region
dotted with trees and shrubs. South of the savanna, in
a band 200 to 300 miles wide along the West African
coast, lies a tropical rain forest. A series of four major
watersheds — the Senegal, Gambia, Volta, and Niger —
dominate West Africa (Map 1.3).

Sudanic  civilization  took  root  at  the  eastern  end
of West Africa beginning around 9000 b.c. and trav-
eled  westward.  Sudanic  peoples  domesticated  cattle
(8500–7500  b.c.)  and  cultivated  sorghum  and  millet
(7500–7000  b.c.).  Over  several  thousand  years,  these
peoples developed a distinctive style of pottery, began
to  cultivate  and  weave  cotton  (6500–3500  b.c.),  and
invented  techniques  for  working  copper  and  iron
(2500–1000 b.c.). Sudanic civilization had its own tra-
dition of monotheism distinct from that of Christians,
Muslims,  and  Jews.  Most  Sudanic  peoples  in  West
Africa  lived  in  stratified  states  ruled  by  kings  and
princes who were regarded as divine.

From  these  cultural  origins,  three  great  empires
arose in succession in the northern savanna. The first,
the  Ghana  Empire,  appeared  sometime  around  a.d.
800.  Ghana  capitalized  on  the  recently  domesticated
camel  to  pioneer  trade  routes  across  the  Sahara  to

CHAPTER 1

  Colliding Worlds, 1450–1600

23

North Africa, where Ghana traders carried the wealth
of West Africa. The Ghana Empire gave way to the Mali
Empire in the thirteenth century, which was eclipsed in
turn by the Songhai Empire in the fifteenth century. All
three empires were composed of smaller vassal king-
doms,  not  unlike  the  Aztec  and  Inca  empires,  and
relied on military might to control their valuable trade
routes.

Gold,  abundant  in  West  Africa,  was  the  corner-
stone of power and an indispensable medium of inter-
national  trade.  By  1450,  West  African  traders  had
carried so much of it across the Sahara that it consti-
tuted one-half to two-thirds of all the gold in circula-
tion in Europe, North Africa, and Asia. Mansa Musa,
the  tenth  emperor  of  Mali,  was  a  devout  Muslim
famed for his construction projects and his support of
mosques and schools. In 1326, he embarked on a pil-
grimage to Mecca with a vast retinue that crossed the
Sahara and passed through Egypt. They spent so much
gold along the way that the region’s money supply was
devalued for more than a decade after their visit.

To  the  south  of  these  empires,  the  lower  savanna
and tropical rain forest of West Africa were home to a
complex mosaic of kingdoms that traded among them-
selves  and  with  the  empires  to  the  north.  In  such  a
densely  populated,  resource-rich  region,  they  also
fought frequently in a competition for local power. A
few of these coastal kingdoms were quite large in size,
but  most  were  small  enough  that  they  have  been
termed  ministates  by  historians.  Comparable  to  the
city-states of Italy, they were often about the size of a
modern-day county in the United States. The tropical
ecosystem prevented them from raising livestock, since
the  tsetse  fly  (which carries  a  parasite  deadly  to  live-
stock) was endemic to the region,
as  was  malaria.  In  place  of  the
grain crops of the savanna, these
peoples pioneered the cultivation
of  yams;
they  also  gathered
resources  from  the  rivers  and
seacoast.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How do the states of
the savanna compare to
those of the Americas and
Europe?

Trans-Saharan and Coastal Trade
For  centuries,  the  primary  avenue  of  trade  for  West
Africans passed through the Ghana, Mali, and Songhai
empires,  whose  power  was  based  on  the  monopoly
they  enjoyed  over  the  trans-Saharan  trade.  Their
caravans  carried  West  African  goods — including
gold,  copper,  salt,  and  slaves — from  the  south  to  the
north  across  the  Sahara,  then  returned  with  textiles
and other foreign goods. For the smaller states clustered

