24

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

London

Madrid

Fez

W

N

S

E

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

Lisbon

Madeira

CANARY IS.

Amsterdam

Rhine

R.

Paris

DanubeR.

Venice

Genoa

Black Sea

Istanbul

Tunis

Antioch

Mediterranean Sea

Alexandria

Cape
Bojador

S A H A R A   D E S E R T

Red
Sea

CAPE
VERDE
IS.

SenegalR.
TAKRUR
GambiaR.

Timbuktu

Bilma

DAURA

NigerR.

HAUSA

Djenné

Gao

Songhay
V
o
l
t
a
R
.

GUINEA

MALI

KANEM

BORNU

.

R
e

Nil

OYO

YORUBA KINGDOMS

BENIN

Elmina

Congo R.

Cape
Verde

MOORS

SenegalR.
WOLOF FULANI
GambiaR.

MANDINGO

BERBERS

SUSU

V
o
l
t
a
R
.

KRUMEN

ASHANTI

AWIKAM

EWE

NigerR.

FONS

YORUBA

Bight of
Benin

Grain Coast
Ivory Coast

Gold Coast
Slave Coast

LOANGO

KONGO

ANGOLA

IBIBIO
IBO EFIK

SEKE

Bight of
Biafra

R.
olga
V

Caspia

n
S
e
a

PersianGulf

Aral
Sea

Silk Road
from Asia

Arabian Sea

from India

INDIAN OCEAN

0

0

250

500 miles

250 500 kilometers

Overland trade routes
Sea trade routes

MAP 1.3
West Africa and the Mediterranean in the Fifteenth Century

Trade routes across the Sahara had long connected West Africa with the Mediterranean region.
Gold, ivory, and slaves moved north and east; ﬁne textiles, spices, and the Muslim faith traveled
south. Beginning in the 1430s, the Portuguese opened up maritime trade with the coastal regions
of West Africa, which were home to many peoples and dozens of large and small states. Over the
next century, the movement of gold and slaves into the Atlantic would surpass that across the
Sahara.

along the West African coast, merchandise originating
in the world beyond the Sahara was scarce and expen-
sive,  while  markets  for  their  own  products  were
limited.

Beginning  in  the  mid-fifteenth  century,  a  newly
opening  coastal  trade  with  Europeans  offered  many
West  African  peoples  a  welcome  alternative.  As
European  sailors  made  their  way  along  the  coast  of
West  and  then  Central  Africa,  they  encountered  a
bewilderingly complicated political landscape. Around

the mouths of the Senegal and Gambia rivers, numer-
ous  Mande-speaking  states  controlled  access  to  the
trade routes into the interior. Proceeding farther along
the coast, they encountered the Akan states, a region
of  several  dozen  independent  but  culturally  linked
peoples. The Akan states had goldfields of their own,
and this region soon became known to Europeans as
the Gold Coast. East of the Akan states lay the Bight of
Benin, which became an early center of the slave trade
and  thus  came  to  be  called  the  Slave  Coast.  Bending

