CHAPTER 1

  Colliding Worlds, 1450–1600

25

Africans acknowledged multiple gods, as well as spirits
that lived in the earth, animals, and plants.

Like animists in the Americas and Europe, African
communities  had  wise  men  and  women  adept  at
manipulating these forces for good or ill. The Sudanic
tradition  of  divine  kingship  persisted,  and  many
people believed that their kings could contact the spirit
world. West Africans treated their ancestors with great
respect, believing that the dead resided in a nearby spir-
itual  realm  and  interceded  in  their  lives.  Most  West
African peoples had secret societies, such as the Poro
for men and the Sande for women,
that united people from different
lineages and clans. These societies
conducted  rituals  that  celebrated
male  virility  and  female  fertility.
“Without children you are naked,”
said a Yoruba proverb. Happy was
the man with a big household, many wives, many chil-
dren, and many relatives — and, in a not very different
vein, many slaves.

PLACE EVENTS IN
CONTEXT
Why were West African
leaders eager to engage in
trade with Europeans?

Terracotta Figure from Mali

Dating to the thirteenth or fourteenth century, this terracotta
ﬁgure came from an archaeological site near Djenna. The
rider wears a large, ornate necklace, while the horse has a
decorative covering on its head. The Mali Empire relied on a
large cavalry to expand and defend its borders, and the horse
was an important symbol of Mali’s wealth and power. Werner
Forman/Art Resource, NY.

south, fifteenth-century sailors encountered the King-
dom of Kongo in Central Africa, the largest state on the
Atlantic  seaboard,  with  a  coastline  that  ran  for  some
250 miles. It was here in 1578 that Duarte Lopez visited
the  capital  city  of  more  than  100,000  residents.
Wherever they went ashore along this route, European
traders  had  to  negotiate  contacts  on  local  terms
(Thinking Like a Historian, p. 26).

The Spirit World
Some  West  Africans  who  lived  immediately  south
of  the  Sahara — the  Fulanis  in  Senegal,  the  Mande-
speakers  in  Mali,  and  the  Hausas  in  northern
Nigeria — learned  about  Islam  from  Arab  merchants
and  Muslim  leaders  called  imams.  Converts  to  Islam
knew  the  Koran  and  worshipped  only  a  single  God.
Some of their cities, like Timbuktu, the legendary com-
mercial  center  on  the  Niger  River,  became  centers  of
Islamic  learning  and  instruction.  But  most  West

Exploration and Conquest
European  engagement  with  the  wider  Atlantic  world
began  around  1400,  when  the  Portuguese  monarchy
propelled  Europe  into  overseas  expansion.  Portugal
soon  took  a  leading  role  in  the  African  slave  trade,
while the newly unified kingdom of Spain undertook
Europe’s first conquests in the Americas. These two ven-
tures,  though  not  initially  linked,  eventually  became
cornerstones in the creation of the “Atlantic World.”

Portuguese Expansion
As a young soldier fighting North African Moors with
the  Crusading  Order  of  Christ,  Prince  Henry  of
Portugal (1394–1460) learned of Arab merchants’ rich
trade  in  gold  and  slaves  across  the  Sahara.  Seeking  a
maritime  route  to  the  source  of  this  trade  in  West
Africa, Henry founded a center for oceanic navigation.
Henry’s mariners, challenged to find a way through the
treacherous  waters  off  the  northwest  African  coast,
designed  a  better-handling  vessel,  the  caravel,  rigged
with a lateen (triangular) sail that enabled the ship to
tack  into  the  wind.  This  innovation  allowed  them  to
sail  far  into  the  Atlantic,  where  they  discovered  and
colonized the Madeira and Azore islands. From there,
they sailed in 1435 to sub-Saharan Sierra Leone, where
they  exchanged  salt,  wine,  and  fish  for  African  ivory
and gold.

