T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Colliding Cultures

Carefully  consider  each  of  the  objects  or  texts  below.  What  meanings  might
you — thinking like a historian — impart to them?

1.  Mississippian warrior gorget (neck guard), A.D.

1250–1350.

Source: The National Museum of the American Indian/George Gustav Heye
Center/New York, NY William E. Meyer Collection 15/853.

2.  Portuguese officer’s account of de Soto’s expedi-

tion, 1557. This excerpt describes Indian resistance
in the face of de Soto’s campaign of conquest
against Indians in the southeastern United States.

[Spanish soldiers] went over a swampy land where the
horsemen could not go. A half league from camp they
came upon some Indian huts near the river; [but] the
people who were inside them plunged into the river. They
captured four Indian women, and twenty Indians came at
us and attacked us so stoutly that we had to retreat to the
camp, because of their being (as they are) so skillful with
their weapons. Those people are so warlike and so quick
that they make no account of foot soldiers; for if these go
for them, they flee, and when their adversaries turn their
backs they are immediately on them. The farthest they
flee is the distance of an arrow shot. They are never quiet
but always running and crossing from one side to another
so that the crossbows or the arquebuses can not be aimed
at them; and before a crossbowman can fire a shot, an
Indian can shoot three or four arrows, and very seldom

26

does he miss what he shoots at. If the arrow does not find
armor, it penetrates as deeply as a crossbow. The bows are
very long and the arrows are made of certain reeds like
canes, very heavy and so tough that a sharpened cane
passes through a shield. Some are pointed with a fish
bone, as sharp as an awl, and others with a certain stone
like a diamond point.

3.  Duarte Lopez, A Report on the Kingdom of Kongo,
1591. A Portuguese explorer’s account of his travels
in southern Africa in the sixteenth century.

[T]he Kingdom of Sofala lies between the two rivers,
Magnice and Cuama, on the sea-coast. It is small in size,
and has but few villages and towns. . . . It is peopled by
Mohammedans, and the king himself belongs to the same
sect. He pays allegiance to the crown of Portugal, in order
not to be subject to the government of Monomotapa
[Mutapa]. On this account the Portuguese have a fortress
at the mouth of the River Cuama, trading with those
countries in gold, amber, and ivory, all found on that
coast, as well as in slaves, and giving in exchange silk
stuffs and taffetas. . . . It is said, that from these regions
the gold was brought by sea which served for Solomon’s
Temple at Jerusalem, a fact by no means improbable, for
in these countries of Monomotapa are found several
ancient buildings of stone, brick, and wood, and of such
wonderful workmanship, and architecture, as is nowhere
seen in the surrounding provinces.

The Kingdom of Monomotapa is extensive, and has a

large population of Pagan heathens, who are black, of
middle stature, swift of foot, and in battle fight with great
bravery, their weapons being bows and arrows, and light
darts. There are numerous kings tributary to Monomo-
tapa, who constantly rebel and wage war against it. The
Emperor maintains large armies, which in the provinces
are divided into legions, after the manner of the Romans,
for, being a great ruler, he must be at constant warfare in
order to maintain his dominion. Amongst his warriors,
those most renowned for bravery, are the female legions,
greatly valued by the Emperor, being the sinews of his
military strength.

