4.  Benin figurine of a Portuguese soldier from the

seventeenth century. This brass ﬁgure would have
been kept on an altar or on the roof of the royal
palace of Benin.

6.  Sixteenth- or seventeenth-century Spanish silver
real. Spain minted enormous quantities of Ameri-
can silver; much of it was shipped to Manila, where
it was exchanged for Asian luxury goods.

Source: © The Trustees of the British Museum/Art Resource, NY.

5.  Sixteenth-century Portuguese coin made from

African gold. Before the discovery of the Americas,
half of the Old World’s gold came from sub-
Saharan Africa.

Source: © The Trustees of the British Museum/Art Resource, NY.

Source: © RMN-Grand Palais/Art Resource, NY.

Sources: (2) John E. Worth, “Account of the Northern Conquest and Discovery of
Hernando de Soto by Rodrigo Rangel,” trans. John E. Worth, in Lawrence A. Clayton et
al., eds., The De Soto Chronicles: The Expedition of Hernando de Soto to North America
in 1539–1543 (University of Alabama Press, 1993), 59; (3) Filippo Pigafetta, A Report of
the Kingdom of Congo, trans. Margarite Hutchinson (London: John Murray, 1881),
117–119.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  What can you infer about cultural values among Missis-

sippian peoples from source 1? About the cultural values
of the Spanish and Portuguese from sources 5 and 6?
What can’t you infer from these objects?

2.  How does de Soto describe the native peoples he

encounters in Florida (source 2)? How does that com-
pare to the traits of the African kingdoms that Lopez
comments upon in source 3? Why might the king
of Sofala prefer a Portuguese alliance to subjection
to Monomotapa?

3.  What does source 4 suggest about Benin relations with

the Portuguese?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

What do these sources tell us about the ways Native Ameri-
cans, Europeans, and Africans thought about themselves,
perceived one another, and capitalized on cross-cultural
exchanges as they came into sustained contact? Write a
short essay that considers the connection between the
impulses of warfare and commerce, which appear again
and again in contact settings.

27

