28

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

Banza in the Kingdom of Kongo, c. 1670

The city of Banza, or Mbanza Kongo, was the capital of the Kingdom of Kongo when Portuguese traders
ﬁrst arrived in 1483. Kongo’s king, Nzinga a Nkuwu, chose to be baptized to cement an alliance with Por-
tugal and took the name João I. Kongo became ofﬁcially Christian and Banza came to be known as São
Salvador. Duarte Lopez visited and described the city in 1578; this engraving shows the city as it appeared
a century later. Banza in the Kingdom of Kongo, San Salvador, from Olfert Dapper, ca. 1668.

Henry’s efforts were soon joined to those of Italian
merchants,  who  were  being  forced  out  of  eastern
Mediterranean trade routes by the rising power of the
Ottoman Empire. Cut off from Asia, Genoese traders
sought an Atlantic route to the lucrative markets of the
Indian  Ocean.  They  began  to  work  with  Portuguese
and Castilian mariners and monarchs to finance trad-
ing  voyages,  and  the  African  coast  and  its  offshore
islands opened to their efforts. European voyagers dis-
covered the Canaries, the Cape Verde Islands, and São
Tomé; all of them became laboratories for the expan-
sion of Mediterranean agriculture.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
How did Europe’s desire
for an ocean route to Asia
shape its contacts with
Africa?

On  these  Atlantic  islands,  planters  transformed
local  ecosystems  to  experiment
with  a  variety  of  familiar  cash
crops:  wheat,  wine  grapes,  and
woad,  a  blue  dye  plant;  livestock
and  honeybees;  and,  where  the
climate permitted, sugar. By 1500,

Madeira  was  producing  2,500  metric  tons  a  year,
and Madeira sugar was available — in small, expensive
quantities — in  London,  Paris,  Rome,  and  Constan-
tinople.  Most  of  the  islands  were  unpopulated.  The
Canaries were the exception; it took Castilian adven-
turers  decades  to  conquer  the  Guanches  who  lived
there. Once defeated, they were enslaved to labor in the
Canaries or on Madeira, where they carved irrigation
canals into the island’s steep rock cliffs.

Europeans made no such inroads on the continent
of  Africa  itself.  The  coastal  kingdoms  were  well
defended,  and  yellow  fever,  malaria,  and  dysentery
quickly struck down Europeans who spent any time in
the  interior  of  West  Africa.  Instead  they  maintained
small,  fortified  trading  posts  on  offshore  islands  or
along the coast, usually as guests of the local king.

Portuguese  mariners  continued  to  look  for  an
Atlantic  route  to  Asia.  In  1488,  Bartolomeu  Dias
rounded the Cape of Good Hope, the southern tip of

