CHAPTER 1

  Colliding Worlds, 1450–1600

29

Africa. Vasco da Gama reached East Africa in 1497 and
India in the following year; his ships were mistaken for
those of Chinese traders, the last pale-skinned men to
arrive by sea. Although da Gama’s inferior goods — tin
basins,  coarse  cloth,  honey,  and  coral  beads — were
snubbed  by  the  Arab  and  Indian  merchants  along
India’s Malabar Coast, he managed to acquire a highly
profitable  cargo  of  cinnamon  and  pepper.  Da  Gama
returned to India in 1502 with twenty-one fighting ves-
sels,  which  outmaneuvered  and  outgunned  the  Arab
fleets. Soon the Portuguese government set up fortified
trading posts for its merchants at key points around the
Indian  Ocean,  in  Indonesia,  and  along  the  coast  of
China  (Map  1.4).  In  a  transition  that  sparked  the
momentous growth of European wealth and power, the
Portuguese and then the Dutch replaced the Arabs as
the leaders in Asian commerce.

The African Slave Trade
Portuguese  traders  likewise  ousted  Arab  merchants
as  the  prime  purveyors  of  African  slaves.  Coerced
labor — through slavery, serfdom, or indentured servi-
tude — was  the  norm  in  most  premodern  societies,
and  in  Africa  slavery  was  wide-
spread.  Some  Africans  were
held  in  bondage  as  security  for
debts;  others  were  sold  into  ser-
vitude  by  their  kin  in  exchange
for  food  in  times  of  famine;
many  others  were  war  captives.
Slaves were a key commodity of exchange, sold as agri-
cultural  laborers,  concubines,  or  military  recruits.
Sometimes  their  descendants  were  freed,  but  others
endured hereditary bondage. Sonni Ali (r. 1464–1492),

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How was the African slave
trade adapted to Euro-
pean needs?

CABOT (1497)

ENGLAND

EUROPE

Novgorod

Bruges

Kiev

Genoa

Granada

Venice

Kaffa

Constantinople

Antioch

Fez

Tunis

Mediterranean Sea

Alexandria

Baghdad
Aleppo Basra

PERSIA

Ormuz

A S I A

MONGOLIA

Merv

Balkh

Kashgar

Ansi

Beijing

JAPAN

CHINA

INDIA
Surat
Cambay

Masulipatam

Calicut

Ceylon

MALABAR
COAST

Sumatra

Hangzhou

Guangzhou

PACIFIC
OCEAN

PHILIPPINES

MOLUCCAS

Malacca

Java

INDIAN OCEAN

A U S T R A L I A

ARABIA
Mecca

Aden

Bilma
A F R I C A

Mogadishu

Zanzibar

Sofala

Trade Routes

European Explorations to 1500

Arab
Trans-Asian/Mongol
European
Aztec/North American
Inca/Andean

Dias (1487–88)
Columbus (1493–94)
Cabot (1497)
da Gama (1497–98)
Vespucci (1501)
de Soto (1539–1542)

N ORT H  AMERICA

ATLANTIC OCEAN

AZTEC
EMPIRE

DE SOTO (1539–42)

COLUMBUS (1493–94)

Tenochtitlán

Timbuktu

SOUT H
AMERICA

INCA
EMPIRE

Cuzco

PACIFIC OCEAN

0

0

2,000

4,000 miles

2,000

4,000 kilometers

VESPUCCI (1501)

Jenne

DIAS (1487–88)

DA GAMA (1497–98)

W

N

S

E

MAP 1.4
The Eurasian Trade System and European Maritime Ventures, c. 1500

For centuries, the Mediterranean Sea was the meeting point for the commerce of Europe, North
Africa, and Asia — via the Silk Road from China and the Spice Route from India. Beginning in the
1490s, Portuguese, Spanish, and Dutch rulers and merchants subsidized Christian maritime explorers
who discovered new trade routes around Africa and new sources of wealth in the Americas. These
initiatives undermined the commercial primacy of the Arab Muslim–dominated Mediterranean.

