30

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

the ruler of the powerful Songhai Empire, personally
owned twelve “tribes” of hereditary agricultural slaves,
many of them seized in raids against stateless peoples.
Slaves were also central to the trans-Saharan trade.
When the renowned Tunisian adventurer Ibn Battuta
crossed the Sahara from the Kingdom of Mali around
1350, he traveled with a caravan of six hundred female
slaves,  destined  for  domestic  service  or  concubinage
in  North  Africa,  Egypt,  and  the  Ottoman  Empire.
Between a.d. 700 and 1900, it is estimated that as many
as nine million Africans were sold in the trans-Saharan
slave trade.

Europeans initially were much more interested in
trading for gold and other commodities than in trad-
ing  for  human  beings,  but  gradually  they  discovered
the  enormous  value  of  human  trafficking.  To  exploit
and redirect the existing African slave trade, Portuguese
merchants established fortified trading posts like those
in  the  Indian  Ocean  beginning  at  Elmina  in  1482,

where  they  bought  gold  and  slaves  from  African
princes and warlords. First they enslaved a few thou-
sand Africans each year to work on sugar plantations
on  São  Tomé,  Cape  Verde,  the  Azores,  and  Madeira;
they  also  sold  slaves  in  Lisbon,  which  soon  had  an
African  population  of  9,000.  After  1550,  the  Atlantic
slave  trade,  a  forced  diaspora  of  African  peoples,
expanded enormously as Europeans set up sugar plan-
tations in Brazil and the West Indies.

Sixteenth-Century Incursions
As Portuguese traders sailed south and east, the Spanish
monarchs  Ferdinand  II  of  Aragon  and  Isabella  I  of
Castile financed an explorer who looked to the west. As
Renaissance  rulers,  Ferdinand  (r.  1474–1516)  and
Isabella (r. 1474–1504) saw national unity and foreign
commerce as the keys to power and prosperity. Married
in  an  arranged  match  to  combine  their  Christian

The Map Behind Columbus’s Voyage

In 1489, Henricus Martellus, a German cartographer living in Florence, produced this huge (4 feet by 6 feet)
view of the known world, probably working from a map devised by Christopher Columbus’s brother,
Bartholomew. The map uses the spatial projection of the ancient Greek philosopher Claudius Ptolemy
(A.D. 90–168) and incorporates information from Marco Polo’s explorations in Asia and Bartolomeu Dias’s
recent voyage around the tip of Africa. Most important, it greatly exaggerates the width of Eurasia,
thereby suggesting that Asia lies only 5,000 miles west of Europe (rather than the actual distance
of 15,000 miles). Using Martellus’s map, Columbus persuaded the Spanish monarchs to support his
 westward voyage. Bildarchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz/Art Resource, NY.

