CHAPTER 1

  Colliding Worlds, 1450–1600

31

 kingdoms, the young rulers completed the centuries-
long  reconquista, the campaign by Spanish Catholics
to drive Muslim Arabs from the European mainland, by
capturing Granada, the last Islamic territory in Western
Europe, in 1492. Using Catholicism to build a sense of
“Spanishness,”  they  launched  the  brutal  Inquisition
against  suspected  Christian  heretics  and  expelled  or
forcibly converted thousands of Jews and Muslims.

Columbus  and  the  Caribbean  Simultaneously,
Ferdinand  and  Isabella  sought  trade  and  empire  by
subsidizing the voyages of Christopher Columbus, an
ambitious and daring mariner from Genoa. Columbus
believed that the Atlantic Ocean, long feared by Arab
merchants as a 10,000-mile-wide “green sea of darkness,”
was  a  much  narrower  channel  of  water  separating
Europe from Asia. After cajoling and lobbying for six
years,  Columbus  persuaded  Genoese  investors  in
Seville;  influential  courtiers;  and,  finally,  Ferdinand
and Isabella to accept his dubious theories and finance
a western voyage to Asia.

Columbus  set  sail  in  three  small  ships  in  August
1492. Six weeks later, after a perilous voyage of 3,000
miles, he disembarked on an island in the present-day
Bahamas.  Believing  that  he  had  reached  Asia — “the
in  fifteenth-century  parlance — Columbus
Indies,”
called  the  native  inhabitants  Indians  and  the  islands
the West Indies. He was surprised by the crude living
conditions but expected the native peoples “easily [to]
be made Christians.” He claimed the islands for Spain
and then explored the neighboring Caribbean islands
and  demanded  tribute  from  the  local  Taino,  Arawak,
and Carib peoples. Buoyed by stories of rivers of gold
lying  “to  the  west,”  Columbus  left  forty  men  on  the
island  of  Hispaniola  (present-day  Haiti  and  the
Dominican  Republic)  and  returned  triumphantly  to
Spain (Map 1.5).

To see a longer excerpt of Columbus’s views of the
West Indies, along with other primary sources from
this period, see Sources for America’s History.

110W

100W

NORTH
AMERICA
(cid:3)
S

90W

80W

Gulf of Mexico

CUBA

(cid:55)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:105)(cid:81)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:57)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:93)

(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

W

N

S

E

(cid:56)(cid:91)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:79)

(cid:2)

(cid:55)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:79)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)

(cid:3)
G

70W

ATL ANTIC
O CEAN

HISPANIOLA
(cid:3)G
(cid:54)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:82)
(cid:39)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:82)
(cid:2)

60W

20N

PUERTO
RICO

C a r i b b e a n   S e a

(cid:3)
G

TRINIDAD

10N

P A C I F I C   O C E A N

INCA
EMPIRE

Area of
main map

SOUTH
AMERICA

GALÁPAGOS IS.

(cid:3)
G

(cid:3)
G

S O U T H
A M E R I C A

Aztec Empire

Mayan Empire

Inca Empire

(cid:3)
S
G

Mining area

Silver

Gold

Columbus’s voyages
1498–1500
1502–1504

0

Cortés’s conquest
1519–1521

Pizarro’s conquest

1524–1535

MAP 1.5
The Spanish Conquest of America’s Great Empires

The Spanish ﬁrst invaded the islands of the Caribbean, largely wiping out the native peoples.
Rumors of a gold-rich civilization led to Cortés’s invasion of the Aztec Empire in 1519. By 1535,
other Spanish conquistadors had conquered the Mayan temple cities and the Inca empire in Peru,
completing one of the great conquests in world history.

