A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

The Spanish Conquest

of Mexico

How could a Spanish force of 600 men take control of an empire of 20 million
people? That the Spanish had steel swords, armor, some guns, horses, and attack
dogs  certainly  gave  them  a  military  advantage.  Still,  concerted  attack  by  the
armies  of  the  Aztecs  and  their  allies  would  have  overwhelmed  the  invaders
before they reached the capital of Tenochtitlán. Why was there no such attack?
One reason was that Cortés’s force was bolstered by a sizable army from Tlaxcala,
an independent kingdom hostile to the Aztecs. A later tradition also suggests
that some Aztecs, including Moctezuma, thought that Cortés might be an emis-
sary of their god Quetzalcoatl.

These documents come from people who experienced the conquest. Consider
them ﬁrst as sources: How trustworthy are they? Are they biased in any way?
Then think about their contents: Do their accounts agree? Do they explain why
the Spaniards reached the city unmolested?

Bernal Díaz del Castillo
Cortés and Moctezuma Meet

Bernal  Díaz  was  an  unlikely  chronicler  of  great  events.
Born  poor,  he  went  to  America  as  a  common  soldier  in
1514 and served under conquistadors in Panama and Cuba.
In  1519,  Bernal  Díaz  joined  Cortés’s  expedition,  fought
in  many  battles,  and  as  a  reward  received  an  estate  in
present-day  Guatemala.  In  his  old  age,  Díaz  wrote  The
True History of the Conquest of New Spain, a compelling
memoir written from the perspective of a common soldier.
In fresh and straightforward prose, it depicts the conquest
as  a  divinely  blessed  event  that  saved  the  non-Aztec
peoples of Mexico from a barbarous regime.

The Great Moctezuma had sent these great Caciques in
advance to receive us, and when they came before Cortés
they bade us welcome in their language, and as a sign of
peace, they touched their hands against the ground. . . .

When we arrived near to [Tenochtitlán], . . . the Great

Moctezuma got down from his litter, and those great
Caciques [aristocrats] supported him with their arms
beneath a marvelously rich canopy of green coloured
feathers with much gold and silver embroidery . . . which
was wonderful to look at. The Great Moctezuma was
richly attired according to his usage, and he was shod
with sandals, the soles were of gold and the upper part
adorned with precious stones. . . .

Many other Lords walked before the Great

Moctezuma, sweeping the ground where he would tread
and spreading cloths on it, so that he should not tread on
the earth. Not one of these chieftains dared even to think
of looking him in the face, but kept their eyes lowered
with great reverence. . . .

32

When Cortés was told that the Great Moctezuma was

approaching, and he saw him coming, he dismounted
from his horse, and when he was near Moctezuma, they
simultaneously paid great reverence to one another.
Moctezuma bade him welcome and our Cortés replied
through Doña Marina [Malinali, also called Malinche,
Cortés’s Indian interpreter who bore him a child] wish-
ing him very good health. . . . And then Cortés brought
out a necklace which he had ready at hand, made of glass
stones, . . . which have within them many patterns of
diverse colours, these were strung on a cord of gold and
with musk so that it should have a sweet scent, and he
placed it round the neck of the Great Moctezuma. . . .
Then Cortés through the mouth of Doña Marina told him
that now his heart rejoiced having seen such a great
Prince, and that he took it as a great honour that he had
come in person to meet him. . . .

Thus space was made for us to enter the streets of
Mexico, without being so much crowded. But who could
now count the multitude of men and women and boys
who were in the streets and in canoes on the canals, who
had come out to see us. It was indeed wonderful. . . .
Coming to think it over it seems to be a great mercy that
our Lord Jesus Christ was pleased to give us grace and
courage to dare to enter into such a city; and for the many
times He has saved me from danger of death . . . I give
Him sincere thanks. . . .

They took us to lodge in some large houses, where
there were apartments for all of us, for they had belonged
to the father of the Great Moctezuma, who was named
Axayaca. . . .

Cortés thanked Moctezuma through our interpreters,
and Moctezuma replied, “Malinche, you and your breth-
ren are in your own house, rest awhile,” and then he went

