to his palaces, which were not far away, and we divided
our lodgings by companies, and placed the artillery point-
ing in a convenient direction, and the order which we had
to keep was clearly explained to us, and that we were to be
much on the alert, both the cavalry and all of us soldiers.
A sumptuous dinner was provided for us according to
their use and custom, and we ate it at once. So this was
our lucky and daring entry into the great city of
Tenochtitlan Mexico on the 8th day of November
the year of our Saviour Jesus Christ, 1519.

Source: Bernal Díaz del Castillo, The True History of the Conquest of New Spain, trans.
A. P. Maudslay (1632; London: Routledge, 1928), 272–275.

Friar Bernardino de Sahagún
Aztec Elders Describe the Behavior of
Moctezuma

During the 1550s, Friar Bernardino de Sahagún published
General  History  of  the  Things  of  New  Spain.  His  History
compiled the stories of Aztec elders who lived through the
conquest. They told their stories to Sahagún in a repetitive
style, according to the conventions of Aztec oral histories,
and he translated them into Spanish.

Moctezuma enjoyed no sleep, no food, no one spoke to
him. Whatsoever he did, it was as if he were in torment.
Ofttimes it was as if he sighed, became weak, felt
weak. . . . Wherefore he said, “What will now befall us?
Who indeed stands [in charge]? Alas, until now, I. In
great torment is my heart; as if it were washed in chili
water it indeed burns.” And when he had so heard
what the messengers reported, he was terrified, he was
astounded. . . . Especially did it cause him to faint away
when he heard how the gun, at [the Spaniards’] com-
mand, discharged: how it resounded as if it thundered
when it went off. It indeed bereft one of strength; it shut
off one’s ears. And when it discharged, something like
a round pebble came forth from within. Fire went show-
ering forth; sparks went blazing forth. And its smoke
smelled very foul; it had a fetid odor which verily
wounded the head. And when [the shot] struck a
mountain, it was as if it were destroyed, dissolved . . .
as if someone blew it away.

All iron was their war array. In iron they clothed
themselves. With iron they covered their heads. Iron were
their swords. Iron were their crossbows. Iron were their
shields. Iron were their lances. And those which bore
them upon their backs, their deer [horses], were as tall as
roof terraces.

And their bodies were everywhere covered; only their

faces appeared. They were very white; they had chalky
faces; they had yellow hair, though the hair of some was
black. . . . And when Moctezuma so heard, he was much
terrified. It was as if he fainted away. His heart saddened;
his heart failed him. . . . [but] he made himself resolute;
he put forth great effort; he quieted, he controlled his
heart; he submitted himself entirely to whatsoever he was
to see, at which he was to marvel. . . . [He then greeted
Cortés, as described above.]

And when [the Spaniards] were well settled, they
thereupon inquired of Moctezuma as to all the city’s trea-
sure . . . the devices, the shields. Much did they importune
him; with great zeal they sought gold. . . . Thereupon were
brought forth all the brilliant things; the shields, the
golden discs, the devils’ necklaces, the golden nose cres-
cents, the golden leg bands, the golden arm bands, the
golden forehead bands.

Source: From Friar Bernardino de Sahagún, Florentine Codex: General History of New
Spain, translated by Arthur O. Anderson and Charles E. Dibble. Copyright © 1975.
Reprinted by permission of Utah Press.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Both Díaz’s account and that of the Aztec elders were
written in retrospect, and both reﬂect their authors’
awareness of the impending conquest. Compare the
tone of these accounts. How does each reﬂect the
author’s knowledge of what is to come?

2.  Why does Moctezuma pay “great reverence” to Cortés?
Why does Cortés return the honor? What is the strategy
of each leader?

3.  What is Díaz’s explanation for the easy entry of the

Spanish into the city? What explanation is suggested by
the elders’ account?

33

