34

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

Although  Columbus  brought  back  no  gold,  the
Spanish  monarchs  supported  three  more  of  his  voy-
ages. Columbus colonized the West Indies with more
than 1,000 Spanish settlers — all men — and hundreds
of domestic animals. But he failed to find either golden
treasures  or  great  kingdoms,  and  his  death  in  1506
went virtually unnoticed.

A  German  geographer  soon  labeled  the  newly
found  continents  America  in  honor  of  a  Florentine
explorer,  Amerigo  Vespucci.  Vespucci,  who  had
explored  the  coast  of  present-day  South  America
around 1500, denied that the region was part of Asia.
He called it a nuevo mundo, a “new world.” The Spanish
crown called the two continents Las Indias (“the Indies”)
and wanted to make them a new Spanish world.

The  Spanish  Invasion   After brutally subduing the
Arawaks and Tainos on Hispaniola, the Spanish probed
the mainland for gold and slaves. In 1513, Juan Ponce

de  León  explored  the  coast  of  Florida  and  gave  that
peninsula its name. In the same year, Vasco Núñez de
Balboa  crossed  the  Isthmus  of  Darien  (Panama)  and
became  the  first  European  to  see  the  Pacific  Ocean.
Rumors  of  rich  Indian  kingdoms  encouraged  other
Spaniards,  including  hardened  veterans  of  the  recon-
quista, to invade the mainland. The Spanish monarchs
offered  successful  conquistadors  noble  titles,  vast
estates, and Indian laborers.

With  these  inducements  before  him,  in  1519
Hernán Cortés (1485–1547) led an army of 600 men to
the Yucatán Peninsula. Gathering allies among native
peoples who chafed under Aztec rule, he marched on
Tenochtitlán  and  challenged  its  ruler,  Moctezuma.
Awed  by  the  Spanish  invaders,  Moctezuma  received
Cortés with great ceremony (American Voices, p. 32).
However, Cortés soon took the emperor captive, and
following a prolonged siege, he and his men captured
the  city.  The  conquest  took  a  devastating  toll:  the

Mexican Counterattack

This image, which comes from a history of the Aztecs written in 1570 by the Spanish Dominican monk Diego
Durán, illustrates a successful counterattack by Mexica warriors against Spanish soldiers prior to the ﬁnal
conquest of Tenochtitlán. The Spaniards try to hold their position as the Mexicans prepare to strike. Institut
Amatller d’Art Hispanic/Arxiu Mas.

