CHAPTER 1

  Colliding Worlds, 1450–1600

35

 conquerors cut off the city’s supply of food and water,
and  the  residents  of  Tenochtitlán  suffered  spectacu-
larly.  By  1521,  Cortés  and  his  men  had  toppled  the
Aztec Empire.

The Spanish had a silent ally: disease. Having been
separated  from  Eurasia  for  thousands  of  years,  the
inhabitants of the Americas had no immunities to com-
mon European diseases. After the Spaniards arrived, a
massive  smallpox  epidemic  ravaged  Tenochtitlán,
“striking everywhere in the city,” according to an Aztec
source, and killing Moctezuma’s brother and thousands
more.  “They  could  not  move,  they  could  not
stir. . . . Covered,  mantled  with  pustules,  very  many
people  died  of  them.”  Subsequent  outbreaks  of  small-
pox,  influenza,  and  measles  killed  hundreds  of  thou-
sands  of  Indians  and  sapped  the  survivors’  morale.
Exploiting this demographic weakness, Cortés quickly
extended Spanish rule over the Aztec Empire. His lieu-
tenants then moved against the Mayan city-states of the
Yucatán Peninsula, eventually conquering them as well.
In  1524,  Francisco  Pizarro  set  out  to  accomplish
the  same  feat  in  Peru.  By  the  time  he  and  his  small
force  of  168  men  and  67  horses  finally  reached  their
destination  in  1532,  half  of  the  Inca  population  had
already died from European diseases. Weakened mili-
tarily  and  divided  between  rival  claimants  to  the
throne, the Inca nobility was easy prey. Pizarro killed
Atahualpa, the last Inca emperor, and seized his enor-
mous wealth. Although Inca resistance continued for a
generation,  the  conquest  was  complete  by  1535,  and
Spain was now the master of the wealthiest and most
populous regions of the Western Hemisphere.

The  Spanish  invasion  changed  life  forever  in  the
Americas. Disease and warfare wiped out virtually all
of the Indians of Hispaniola — at least 300,000 people.
In  Peru,  the  population  of  9  million  in  1530  plum-
later.
meted  to
Mesoamerica suffered the greatest losses: In one of the
great demographic disasters in world history, its popu-
lation  of  20  million  Native  Americans  in  1500  had
dwindled to just 3 million in 1650.

fewer  than  500,000  a  century

Cabral  and  Brazil  At  the  same  time,  Portuguese
efforts to find a sailing route around the southern tip of
Africa led to a surprising find. As Vasco da Gama and
his contemporaries experimented with winds and cur-
rents,  their  voyages  carried  them  ever  farther  away
from the African coast and into the Atlantic. On one
such voyage in 1500, the Portuguese commander Pedro
Alvares Cabral and his fleet were surprised to see land
loom up in the west. Cabral named his discovery Ihla
da  Vera  Cruz — the  Island  of  the  True  Cross — and

continued on his way toward India. Others soon fol-
lowed and changed the region’s name to Brazil after the
indigenous tree that yielded a valuable red dye; for sev-
eral decades, Portuguese sailors traded  with the Tupi
Indians  for  brazilwood.  Then  in  the  1530s,  to  secure
Portugal’s claim, King Dom João III sent settlers who
began  the  long,  painstaking  process  of  carving  out
sugar  plantations  in  the  coastal  lowlands.  For  several
decades, Native Americans supplied most of the labor
for  these  operations,  but  African  slaves  gradually
replaced them. Brazil would soon become the world’s
leading producer of sugar; it would also devour African
lives.  By  introducing  the  plantation  system  to  the
Americas — a  form  of  estate  agriculture  using  slave
labor that was pioneered by Italian merchants and cru-
sading knights in the twelfth century and transplanted
to  the  islands  off  the  coast  of  Africa  in  the  fifteenth
century — the  Portuguese  set  in  motion  one  of  the
most significant developments of the early modern era.
By the end of the sixteenth century, the European
colonization  of  the  Americas  had  barely  begun.  Yet
several  of  its  most  important  elements  were  already
taking shape. Spanish efforts demonstrated that densely
populated empires were especially vulnerable to con-
quest  and  were  also  especially  valuable  sources  of
wealth. The Portuguese had discovered the viability of
sugar plantations in the tropical regions of the Americas
and pioneered the transatlantic slave trade as a way of
manning  them.  And  contacts  with  native  peoples
revealed  their  devastating  vulnerabilities  to  Eurasian
diseases — one  part  of  the  larger  phenomenon  of  the
Columbian Exchange (discussed in Chapter 2).

SUMMARY
Native American, European, and African societies de-
veloped independently over thousands of years before
they experienced direct contacts with one another. In
the Americas, residents of Mesoamerica and the Andes
were  fully  sedentary  (with  individual  ownership  of
land and intensive agriculture), but elsewhere societies
were  semisedentary  (with  central  fields  and  villages
that  were  occupied  seasonally)  or  nonsedentary
(hunter-gatherers). West and Central Africa also had a
mix  of  sedentary,  semisedentary,  and  nonsedentary
settlements. Western Europe, by contrast, was predom-
inantly sedentary. All three continents had a complex
patchwork  of  political  organization, from  empires,  to
kingdoms  and  chiefdoms,  to  principalities,  duchies,
and  ministates;  everywhere,  rulership  was  imbued
with notions of spiritual power. Ruling classes relied on

