36

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

warfare, trade, and tribute (or taxes) to dominate those
around  them  and  accumulate  precious  goods  that
helped  to  set  them  apart  from  ordinary  laborers,  but
they also bore responsibility for the well-being of their
subjects and offered them various forms of protection.
As Portuguese and Castilian (later Spanish) seafar-
ers pushed into the Atlantic, they set in motion a chain
of  events  whose  consequences  they  could  scarcely
imagine. From a coastal trade with Africa that was sec-
ondary to their efforts to reach the Indian Ocean, from
the miscalculations of Columbus and the happy acci-
dent  of  Cabral,  developed  a  pattern  of  transatlantic

exploration,  conquest,  and  exploitation  that  no  one
could have foretold or planned. In the tropical zones of
the Caribbean and coastal Brazil, invading Europeans
enslaved  Native  Americans  and  quickly  drove  them
into  extinction  or  exile.  The  demands  of  plantation
agriculture soon led Europeans to import slaves from
Africa,  initiating  a  transatlantic  trade  that  would
destroy African lives on both sides of the ocean. And
two  of  the  greatest  empires  in  the  world — the  Aztec
and Incan empires — collapsed in response to unseen
biological forces that acted in concert with small invad-
ing armies.

European Map of Brazil,
c. 1519

This lavishly illustrated map of
Brazil is drawn from the Miller
Atlas, made by order of King
Manuel I of Portugal around
1519. It features images of
Indians harvesting brazilwood;
macaws and other colorful birds;
a monkey; and — improbably — a
ﬁre-breathing dragon. Note, too,
the dense annotations and place
names along the coast — a
reminder that Portuguese famil-
iarity with Brazil was conﬁned
almost entirely to the seaboard.
Bibliotheque Nationale de France.

