CHAPTER 1

  CHAPTER REVIEW

37

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

tribute (p. 8)
matriarchy (p. 15)
animism (p. 17)
patriarchy (p. 18)
primogeniture (p. 18)
peasants (p. 18)
republic (p. 19)
civic humanism (p. 20)
Renaissance (p. 20)
guilds (p. 20)

Key People

Hiawatha (p. 13)
Martin Luther (p. 22)
Mansa Musa (p. 23)
Vasco da Gama (p. 29)

Christianity (p. 21)
heresy (p. 22)
Islam (p. 22)
Crusades (p. 22)
predestination (p. 22)
Protestant Reformation (p. 22)
Counter-Reformation (p. 22)
trans-Saharan trade (p. 23)
reconquista (p. 31)

Christopher Columbus (p. 31)
Hernán Cortés (p. 34)
Moctezuma (p. 34)
Pedro Alvares Cabral (p. 35)

REVIEW QUESTIONS  Answer these questions to demonstrate your

understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  How did the rulers of Native American, European,
and African empires and kingdoms secure and sus-
tain their power? How did ordinary people benefit
from, or suffer under, their rule?

4.  Compare the societies of the eastern woodlands of
North  America  with  the  kingdoms  of  Western
Europe. What similarities do you see? Differences?
How do you weigh their relative importance?

2.  What role did religious and spiritual ideas play in
shaping the experience of ordinary people on the
three continents?

3.  Why was long-distance trade in exotic goods such
an  important  phenomenon  in  North  America,
Europe, and Africa?

5.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
listed  under  “Peopling”  and  “Work,
events
Exchange, and Technology” on the thematic time-
line on page 5. How did contacts among Europeans,
Native  Americans,  and  Africans  alter  the  econo-
mies of the three continents?

