38

PART 1

  CHAPTER REVIEW

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  The  century
following  the  first  contacts  among  Europe,  sub-
Saharan Africa, and the Americas brought some of
the  most  momentous  changes  in  world  history:  a
dramatic  reconfiguration  of  human  populations
across the globe, new patterns of trade and warfare,
and  immense  challenges  to  peoples’  worldviews.
Thinking  about  our  contemporary  world,  what
monumental  changes  are  currently  affecting  our
lives?  How  would  you  compare  them  with  the
events described in this chapter?

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  Return to the image of The
Last Judgment on page 21. How does the emphasis
on universal truth and everlasting punishment and
reward make Christianity different from animism?
How might faith in such a religious system shape
the values and priorities of believers?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Philip D. Curtin, The Rise and Fall of the Plantation
Complex, 2nd ed. (1998). Traces the long evolution of
plantations and slavery in world history.

David Northrup, Africa’s Discovery of Europe: 1450–
1850, 2nd ed. (2008). European-African interactions
from an African perspective.

Peter C. Mancall, ed., Travel Narratives from the Age of
Discovery (2006). Travelers’ accounts from Asia,
Africa, the Americas, and Europe.

Timothy R. Pauketat, Cahokia (2009). An evocative
account of North America’s great city and archaeolo-
gists’ efforts to unearth it.

Charles C. Mann, 1491 (2005) and 1493 (2011). These
two books explore the Americas before Columbus and
the global changes unleashed by his voyages.

“1492: An Ongoing Voyage” (loc.gov/exhibits/ 1492
/intro.html). Offers images and analysis of the native
cultures of the Western Hemisphere.

