2

C H A P T E R

SPAIN’S TRIBUTE
COLONIES

A New American World

The Columbian Exchange

The Protestant Challenge to

Spain

PLANTATION COLONIES
Brazil’s Sugar Plantations

England’s Tobacco Colonies

The Caribbean Islands

Plantation Life

NEO-EUROPEAN
COLONIES
New France

New Netherland

The Rise of the Iroquois

New England

INSTABILITY, WAR, AND
REBELLION

New England’s Indian Wars

Bacon’s Rebellion, 1675–1676

40

American Experiments
1521–1700

Beginning in the 1660s, legislators in

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
In  what  ways  did  European
migrants  transfer  familiar  patterns
and  institutions  to  their  colonies  in
the Americas, and in what ways did
they  create  new  American  worlds?
How did Native Americans adapt to
the growing presence of Europeans
among them?

Virginia  and  Maryland  hammered
out  the  legal  deﬁnition  of  chattel
slavery:  the  ownership  of  human  beings
as  property.  The  institution  of  slavery  —
which  would  profoundly  affect  African
Americans  and  shape  much  of  American
history  —  had  been  obsolete  in  England
for  centuries,  and  articulating  its  logic
required lawmakers to reverse some of the
most basic presumptions of English law. For example, in 1662 a Virginia statute declared,
“all children borne in this country shalbe held bond or free only according to the condi-
tion  of  the  mother.”  This  idea  —  that  a  child’s  legal  status  derived  from  the  mother,
rather than the father  —  ran contrary to the patriarchal foundations of English law. The
men who sat in Virginia’s House of Burgesses would not propose such a thing lightly.
Why would they decide that the principle of patriarchal descent, which was so funda-
mental to their own worlds, was inappropriate for their slaves?

The  question  needed  to  be  addressed,  according  to  the  statute’s  preamble,  since
“doubts  have  arisen  whether  children  got  by  an  Englishman  upon  a  negro  woman
should be slave or free.” One such case involved Elizabeth Key, a woman whose father
was a free Englishman and mother was an African slave. She petitioned for her freedom
in 1656, based on her father’s status. Her lawyer was an Englishman named  William
Greensted. He not only took Key’s case, but he also fathered two of her children and,
eventually, married her. Key won her case and her freedom from bondage. Elizabeth
Key escaped her mother’s fate  —  a life in slavery  —  because her father and her husband
were both free Englishmen. The 1662 statute aimed to close Key’s avenue to freedom.
The process by which the institution of chattel slavery was molded to the needs of
colonial planters is just one example of the way Europeans adapted the principles they
brought with them to the unfamiliar demands of their new surroundings. In the show-
down between people like Elizabeth Key and William Greensted, on the one hand, and
the members of Virginia’s House of Burgesses on the other, we see how people in dis-
orienting circumstances  —  some in positions in power, others in various states of sub-
jection to their social and political superiors  —  scrambled to make sense of their world
and bend its rules to their advantage. Through countless contests of power and author-
ity like this one, the outlines of a new world gradually began to emerge from the colli-
sion of cultures.

By 1700, three distinct types of colonies had developed in the Americas: the tribute
colonies  created  in  Mexico  and  Peru,  which  relied  initially  on  the  wealth  and  labor  of
indigenous peoples; plantation colonies, where sugar and other tropical and subtropical
crops could be produced with bound labor; and neo-Europes, where colonists sought to
replicate, or at least approximate, economies and social structures they knew at home.

