42

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

Spain’s Tribute Colonies
European  interest  in  the  Americas  took  shape  under
the influence of Spain’s conquest of the Aztec and Inca
empires. There, Spanish colonizers capitalized on pre-
existing systems of tribute and labor discipline to tap
the enormous wealth of Mesoamerica and the Andes.
Once native rulers were overthrown, the Spanish mon-
archs transferred their institutions — municipal coun-
cils, the legal code, the Catholic Church — to America;
the  empire  was  centrally  controlled  to  protect  the
crown’s  immensely  valuable  holdings.  The  Spanish
conquest also set in motion a global ecological trans-
formation  through  a  vast  intercontinental  movement
of plants, animals, and diseases that historians call the
Columbian Exchange. And the conquest triggered hos-
tile responses from Spain’s European rivals, especially
the Protestant Dutch and English (Figure 2.1).

A New American World
After Cortés toppled Moctezuma and Pizarro defeated
Atahualpa  (see  pages  34–35),  leading  conquistadors
received encomiendas from the crown, which allowed
them to claim tribute in labor and goods from Indian
communities.  Later  these  grants  were  repartitioned,
but  the  pattern  was  set  early:  prominent  men  con-
trolled  vast  resources  and  monopolized  Indian  labor.
The  value  of  these  grants  was  dramatically  enhanced
by the discovery of gold and, especially, silver deposits
in  both  Mexico  and  the  Andes.  In  the  decades  after
the  conquest,  mines  were  developed  in  Zacatecas,  in
Guanajuato, and — most famously — at Potosí, high in
the Andes. Spanish officials co-opted the mita system,
which made laborers available to the Inca Empire, to
force Indian workers into the mines. At its peak, Potosí

alone produced 200 tons of silver per year, accounting
for half the world’s supply.

The two great indigenous empires of the Americas
thus  became  the  core  of  an  astonishingly  wealthy
European empire. Vast amounts of silver poured across
the Pacific Ocean to China, where it was minted into
money; in exchange, Spain received valuable Chinese
silks, spices, and ceramics. In Europe, the gold that had
formerly honored Aztec and Inca gods now flowed into
the  countinghouses  of  Spain  and  gilded  the  Catholic
churches  of  Europe.  The  Spanish  crown  benefitted
enormously from all this wealth — at least initially. In
the long run, it triggered ruinous inflation. As a French
traveler noted in 1603: “Everything is dear [expensive]
in Spain, except silver.”

A new society took shape on the conquered lands.
Between  1500  and  1650,  at  least  350,000  Spaniards
migrated to Mesoamerica and the Andes. About two-
thirds  were  males  drawn  from  a  cross  section  of
Spanish society, many of them skilled tradesmen. Also
arriving  were  250,000–300,000  Africans.  Racial  mix-
ture  was  widespread,  and  such  groups  as  mestizos
(Spaniard-Indian)  and  mulattos  (Spaniard-African)
grew  rapidly.  Zambo  (Indian-African)  populations
developed  gradually  as  well.  Over  time,  a  system  of
increasingly complex racial categories developed — the
“casta system” — buttressed by a legal code that differ-
entiated among the principal groups.

Indians were always in the majority in Mexico and
Peru,  but  profound  changes  came  as  their  numbers
declined  and  peoples  of  Spanish  and  mixed-race
descent  grew  in  number.  Spaniards  initially  congre-
gated in cities, but gradually they moved into the coun-
tryside,  creating  large  estates  (known  as  haciendas)
and  regional  networks  of  market  exchange.  Most
Indians remained in their native communities, under
the  authority  of  native  rulers  and  speaking  native

1542
Portuguese Brazil

1608
New France

1628
New Sweden

1613
New Netherland

1530
Spanish Peru

1520
New Spain

FIGURE 2.1
Chronology of European Colonies in the Americas

1607
English Virginia

1620
Plymouth Colony

1630
Massachusetts Bay

1636
Rhode Island
1635
Connecticut
1634
Maryland

