CHAPTER 2

  American Experiments, 1521–1700

43

the

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
How did the ecological
context of colonization
shape interactions be-
tween Europeans and
Native Americans?

significantly  increased  agricultural  yields  and  pop-
ulation  growth  in  other  continents.  Maize  and  pota-
toes, for example, reached China
around  1700;
follow-
in
ing century, the Chinese popula-
tion  tripled  from  100  million  to
300  million.  At  the  same  time,
many animals, plants, and germs
were  carried  to  the  Americas.
European  livestock  transformed
American
landscapes.  While
Native  Americans  domesticated  very  few  animals —
dogs  and  llamas  were  the  principal  exceptions —
Europeans  brought  an  enormous  Old  World  bestiary
to the Americas, including cattle, swine, horses, oxen,
chickens, and honeybees. Eurasian grain crops — wheat,
barley,  rye,  and  rice — made  the  transatlantic  voyage
along  with  inadvertent  imports  like  dandelions  and
other weeds.

The Protestant Challenge to Spain
Beyond the core regions of its empire, Spain claimed
vast American dominions but struggled to hold them.
Controlling the Caribbean basin, which was essential
for Spain’s transatlantic shipping routes, was especially
difficult, since the net of tiny islands spanning the east-
ern Caribbean — the Lesser Antilles — provided many
safe  harbors  for  pirates  and  privateers.  Fortified  out-
posts  in  Havana  and  St.  Augustine  provided  some

languages.  However,  Spanish  priests  suppressed  reli-
gious  ceremonies  and  texts  and  converted  natives  to
Christianity en masse. Catholicism was transformed in
the  process:  Catholic  parishes  took  their  form  from
Indian  communities;  indigenous  ideas  and  expecta-
tions  reshaped  Church  practices;  and  new  forms  of
Native American Christianity emerged in both regions.

The Columbian Exchange
The Spanish invasion permanently altered the natural
as  well  as  the  human  environment.  Smallpox,  influ-
enza,  measles,  yellow  fever,  and  other  silent  killers
carried from Europe and Africa ravaged Indian com-
munities,  whose  inhabitants  had  never  encountered
these  diseases  before  and  thus  had  no  immunity  to
them. In the densely populated core areas, populations
declined  by  90  percent  or  more  in  the  first  century
of contact with Europeans. On islands and in the trop-
ical lowlands, the toll was even heavier; native popula-
tions were often wiped out altogether. Syphilis was the
only  significant  illness  that  traveled  in  the  opposite
direction: Columbus’s sailors carried a virulent strain
of  the  sexually  transmitted  disease  back  to  Europe
with them.

The movement of diseases and peoples across the
Atlantic was part of a larger pattern of biological trans-
formation that historians call the Columbian Exchange
(Map 2.1). Foods of the Western Hemisphere — especially
maize, potatoes, manioc, sweet potatoes, and tomatoes —

Smallpox Victims

Hans Staden, a German soldier who was
shipwrecked in Brazil in 1552, was captured
by a Tupinambá Indian named Jeppipo
Wasu. Shortly thereafter, Wasu and his
family traveled to a neighboring village as
smallpox ravaged the population; when
they returned, they were very sick. Wasu
recovered, but he lost his mother, two
brothers, and two children. This engrav-
ing, which depicts Wasu’s return amid his
townspeople’s grief, appeared in the third
volume of Theodor de Bry’s monumental
America, published in Frankfurt in 1593.
Courtesy of the John Carter Brown Library at
Brown University.

