44

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

Cattle, horses, pigs, wheat, rye,
smallpox and other diseases

N O R T H
A M E R I C A

Maize, potatoes, tobacco, beans,
squash, peppers, cacao, syphilis

Tropic of Cancer

Sugar,rice

Malaria,yellowfever

S O U T H
A M E R I C A

Cassava, manioc, cacao

Equator

Tropic of Capricorn

EUROPE

I
r
o
n
b
a
r
s
,

p
i
g
s

s
a
n
a
n
a
b
,
s
t
u
n
o
c
o
c
,
r
e
v
e
f
w
o
l
l
e
Y

A F R I C A

A S I A

Sugar,plague,rice,tea

Sugar, rice

0

0

1,000

2,000 miles

1,000

2,000 kilometers

W

N

S

E

MAP 2.1
The Columbian Exchange

As European traders and adventurers traversed the world between 1430 and 1600, they began
what historians call the Columbian Exchange, a vast intercontinental movement of plants,
animals, and diseases that changed the course of historical development. The nutritious, high-
yielding American crops of corn and potatoes enriched the diets of Europeans, Africans, and
Asians. However, the Eurasian and African diseases of smallpox, diphtheria, malaria, and yellow
fever nearly wiped out the native inhabitants of the Western Hemisphere and virtually
ensured that they would lose control of their lands.

AUSTRALIA

protection, but they were never sufficient to keep ene-
mies at bay.

And Spain had powerful enemies, their animosity
sharpened  by  the  Protestant  Reformation  and  the
resulting split in European Christendom (see p. 22). In
the  wake  of  Martin  Luther’s  attack  on  the  Catholic
Church, the Protestant critique of Catholicism broad-
ened and deepened. Gold and silver from Mex ico and
Peru made Spain the wealthiest nation in Europe, and
King Philip II (r. 1556–1598) — an ardent Catholic —
its  most  powerful  ruler.  Philip  was  determined  to
root  out  challenges  to  the  Catholic  Church  wherever
they  appeared.  One  such  place  was  in  the  Spanish
Netherlands,  a  collection  of  Dutch-  and  Flemish-
speaking provinces that had grown wealthy from tex-
tile manufacturing and trade with Portuguese outposts
in Africa and Asia. To protect their Calvinist faith and
political liberties, they revolted against Spanish rule in

1566.  After  fifteen  years  of  war,  the  seven  northern
provinces declared their independence, becoming the
Dutch Republic (or Holland) in 1581.

The  English  king  Henry  VIII  (r.  1509–1547)  ini-
tially opposed Protestantism. However, when the pope
refused to annul his marriage to the Spanish princess
Catherine of Aragon in 1534, Henry broke with Rome
and placed himself at the head of the new Church of
England,  which  promptly  granted  an  annulment.
Although  Henry’s  new  church  maintained  most
Catholic doctrines and practices, Protestant teachings
continued to spread. Faced with popular pressure for
reform,  Henry’s  daughter  and  successor,  Queen
Elizabeth I (r. 1558–1603), approved a Protestant con-
fession of faith. At the same time, however, Elizabeth
retained the Catholic ritual of Holy Communion and
left the Church in the hands of Anglican bishops and
archbishops. Elizabeth’s  compromises angered radical

