CHAPTER 2

  American Experiments, 1521–1700

45

Queen Elizabeth Receiving Dutch
Ambassadors

This sixteenth-century Dutch painting
by an anonymous artist depicts a pair
of Dutch ambassadors being received
by England’s Queen Elizabeth I. The
seventeen provinces that constituted
the Dutch Republic were in rebellion
against Spanish rule in the later dec-
ades of the sixteenth century and
hoped for Elizabeth’s support. In
1585 she signed the Treaty of Non-
such, pledging her support for the
Dutch cause. An undeclared war
with Spain ensued, punctuated by
the defeat of the Spanish Armada
in 1588. © Museumslandschaft Hessen Kassel/
The Bridgeman Art Library.

Protestants, but the independent Anglican Church was
anathema to the Spanish king, Philip II.

Elizabeth  supported  a  generation  of  English  sea-
farers who took increasingly aggressive actions against
Spanish control of American wealth. The most famous
of  these  Elizabethan  “sea  dogs”  was  Francis  Drake,  a
rough-hewn,  devoutly  Protestant  farmer’s  son  from
Devon who took to the sea and became a scourge to
Philip’s American interests. In 1577, he ventured into
the  Pacific  to  disrupt  Spanish  shipping  to  Manila.
Drake’s fleet lost three ships and a hundred men, but
the survivors completed the first English circumnavi-
gation of the globe and captured two Spanish treasure
ships.  When  Drake’s  flagship,  the  Golden  Hind,
returned to England in 1580, it brought enough silver,
gold, silk, and spices to bring his investors a 4,700 per-
cent return on their investment.

At  the  same  time,  Elizabeth  supported  military
expeditions  that  imposed  English  rule  over  Gaelic-
speaking Catholic Ireland. Calling the Irish “wild sav-
ages” who were “more barbarous and more brutish in
their customs . . . than in any other part of the world,”
English  soldiers  brutally  massacred  thousands,  pre-
figuring  the  treatment  of  Indians  in  North  America.
To  meet  Elizabeth’s  challenges,  Philip  sent  a  Spanish
Armada — 130 ships and 30,000 men — against England
in 1588. Philip intended to restore the Roman Church
in England and then to wipe out Calvinism in Holland.
But he failed utterly: a fierce storm and English ships
destroyed the Spanish fleet.

Philip continued to spend his American gold and
silver  on  religious  wars,  an  ill-advised  policy  that

diverted workers and resources from Spain’s fledgling
industries. The gold was like a “shewer of Raine,” com-
plained  one  critic,  that  left  “no  benefite  behind.”
Oppressed by high taxes on agriculture and fearful of
military service, more than 200,000 residents of Castile,
once the most prosperous region of Spain, migrated to
America. By the time of Philip’s death in 1598, Spain
was in serious economic decline.

By contrast, England grew significantly during the
sixteenth century, its economy stimulated, as colonial
advocate  Richard  Hakluyt  noted,  by  a  “wounderful
increase of our people.” As England’s population soared
from 3 million in 1500 to 5 million in 1630, its mon-
archs supported the expansion of commerce and man-
ufacturing.  English  merchants  had  long  supplied
European  weavers  with  high-
quality  wool;  around  1500,  they
created  their  own  outwork  tex-
tile  industry.  Merchants  bought
wool  from  the  owners  of  great
estates  and  sent  it  “out”  to  land-
less  peasants  in  small  cottages
to spin and weave into cloth. The
government aided textile entrepreneurs by setting low
wage  rates  and  helped  merchants  by  giving  them
monopolies in foreign markets.

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
Why did Spain’s economy
deteriorate and England’s
economy improve in the
sixteenth century?

This  system  of  state-assisted  manufacturing  and
trade became known as mercantilism. By encouraging
textile  production,  Elizabeth  reduced  imports  and
increased  exports.  The  resulting  favorable  balance  of
trade caused gold and silver to flow into England and
stimulated further economic expansion. Increased trade

