46

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

with  Turkey  and  India  also  boosted  import  duties,
which  swelled  the  royal  treasury  and  the  monarch’s
power. By 1600, Elizabeth’s mercantile policies had laid
the  foundations  for  overseas  colonization.  Now  the
English had the merchant fleet and wealth needed to
challenge Spain’s control of the Western Hemisphere.

Plantation Colonies
As  Spain  hammered  out  its  American  empire  and
struggled  against
its  Protestant  rivals,  Portugal,
England,  France,  and  the  Netherlands  created  suc-
cessful  plantation  settlements  in  Brazil,  Jamestown,
Maryland,  and  the  Caribbean  islands  (Map  2.2).
Worldwide demand for sugar and tobacco fuelled the
growth of these new colonies, and the resulting influx
of colonists diminished Spain’s dominance in the New
World. At the same time, they imposed dramatic new
pressures  on  native  populations,  who  scrambled,  in

turn, to survive the present and carve out pathways to
the future.

Brazil’s Sugar Plantations
Portuguese  colonists  transformed  the  tropical  low-
lands of coastal Brazil into a sugar plantation zone like
the  ones  they  had  recently  created  on  Madeira,  the
Azores,  the  Cape  Verdes,  and  São  Tomé.  The  work
proceeded slowly, but by 1590 more than a thousand
sugar  mills  had  been  established  in  Pernambuco  and
Bahia. Each large plantation had its own milling oper-
ation:  because  sugarcane  is  extremely  heavy  and  rots
quickly, it must be processed on site. Thus sugar plan-
tations combined backbreaking agricultural labor with
milling,  extracting,  and  refining  processes  that  made
sugar  plantations  look  like  Industrial  Revolution–era
factories.

Initially,  Portuguese  planters  hoped  that  Brazil’s
indigenous peoples would supply the labor required to

NORTH AMERICA

Boston

MARYLAND

VIRGINIA

Jamestown

E U R O P E

AZORES

PORTUGAL SPAIN

Lisbon

Seville

MADEIRA IS.

St. Augustine

FLORIDA

AT L A N T I C

CANARY IS.

MEXICO

Havana

Veracruz

CUBA

JAMAICA

SAINT
DOMINGUE

ST. KITTS

O C E A N

A F R I C A

Caribbean
Sea
Cartegena

NEVIS

MARTINIQUE
BARBADOS

GUYANA

CAPE VERDE IS.

Quito

SOUTH AMERICA

PERU

PERNAMBUCO

Recife

BRAZIL

Salvador

BAHIA

MANDE-SPEAKING
          STATES
AKAN STATES

Bight of
Benin
SÃO TOMÉ

KONGO

ANGOLA

BRAZIL

Plantation colony

Rio de Janeiro

0

0

1,000

2,000 miles

1,000

2,000 kilometers

PAC I F IC

O C E AN

MAP 2.2
The Plantation Colonies

The plantation zone in the Americas extended from the tropical coast of Brazil northwestward
through the West Indies and into the tropical and subtropical lowlands of southeastern North
America. Sugar was the most important plantation crop in the Americas, but where the soil or
climate could not support it planters experimented with a wide variety of other possibilities,
including tobacco, indigo, cotton, cacao, and rice.

