CHAPTER 2

  American Experiments, 1521–1700

47

operate their sugar plantations. But, beginning with a
wave of smallpox in 1559, unfamiliar diseases soon rav-
aged the coastal Indian population. As a result, planters
turned to African slaves in ever-growing numbers; by
1620, the switch was complete. While Spanish colonies
in Mexico and Peru took shape with astonishing speed
following  conquest,  Brazil’s  occupation  and  develop-
ment progressed more gradually; it required both trial
and error and hard work to build a paying colony.

England’s Tobacco Colonies
England was slow to embrace the prospect of planting
colonies in the Americas. There were fumbling attempts
in  the  1580s  in  Newfoundland  and  Maine,  privately
organized and poorly funded. Sir Walter Raleigh’s t hree
expeditions  to  North  Carolina  likewise  ended  in

disaster  when  117  settlers  on  Roanoke  Island,  left
unsupplied  for  several  years,  vanished.  The  fate  of
Roanoke — the  “lost  colony” — remains  a  compelling
puzzle for modern historians.

The Jamestown Settlement  Merchants then took
charge  of  English  expansion.  In  1606,  King  James  I
(r.  1603–1625)  granted  to  the  Virginia  Company  of
London  all  the  lands  stretching  from  present-day
North  Carolina  to  southern  New  York.  To  honor  the
memory  of  Elizabeth  I,  the  never-married  “Virgin
Queen,”  the  company’s  directors  named  the  region
Virginia (Map 2.3). Influenced by the Spanish example,
in 1607 the Virginia Company dispatched an all-male
group  with  no  ability  to  support  itself — no  women,
farmers, or ministers were among the first arrivals —
that expected to extract tribute from the region’s Indian

Carolina Indians Fishing, 1585

Though maize was a mainstay of the Indian diet,
native peoples along the Atlantic coast also
harvested protein-rich ﬁsh, crabs, and oysters. In
this watercolor by the English adventurer John
White, Indians gather ﬁsh (in their “cannow,” or
dugout canoe) in the shallow waters of the
Albemarle Sound, off present-day North Carolina.
On the left, note the weir used both to catch ﬁsh
and to store them live for later consumption.
© Trustees of the British Museum/Art Resource, NY.

