48

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

population while it searched out valuable commodities
like pearls and gold. Some were young gentlemen with
personal ties to the company’s shareholders: a bunch of
“unruly Sparks, packed off by their Friends to escape
worse  Destinies  at  home.”  Others  hoped  to  make  a
quick profit. All they wanted, one of them said, was to
“dig gold, refine gold, load gold.”

But there was no gold, and the men fared poorly in
their  new  environment.  Arriving  in  Virginia  after  an
exhausting four-month voyage, they settled on a swampy
peninsula, which they named Jamestown to honor the
king.  There  the  adventurers  lacked  access  to  fresh
water, refused to plant crops, and quickly died off; only

N

W

E

S

hioR.

O

NEW FRANCE

Quebec

Three Rivers

Montreal

St.LawrenceR.

ABENAKI

IROQUOIS

Fort
Orange

ABENAKI

Pemaquid

NEW
ENGLAND
C
o
n
n
e
c
t
i
c
u
t
R

Boston

.

Hartford
New Haven

H
u
d
s
o
n
R

.

Salem

Plymouth

Providence

New Amsterdam

LENAPE/
DELAWARE

S
N
I
A
PotomacR.
T
N
U
O
M

VIRGINIA

MARYLAND

St. Mary’s City

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

Chesapeake Bay

Jamestown

0

0

100

200 miles

100

200 kilometers

Areas Colonized by 1660

Spain
France
England
Netherlands
Key settlements
Not yet explored
by Europeans
Explored but not
settled by Europeans

St. Augustine

TIMUCUAN
CHIEFDOMS

MAP 2.3
Eastern North America, 1650

By 1650, four European nations had permanent
settlements along the eastern coast of North America,
but only England had substantial numbers of settlers,
some 25,000 in New England and another 15,000 in the
Chesapeake region. French, Dutch, Swedish, and English
colonists were also trading European manufactures to
Native Americans in exchange for animal furs and skins,
with far-reaching implications for Indian societies.

N
A
I
H
C
A
L
A
P
P
A

Savannah

TennesseeR.

TUSCARORA

CATAWBA

R.

John White’s Map of Virginia

CREEK

This map, drawn by Roanoke colonist John White, may hold
a clue to the fate of the so-called lost colony. The island of
Roanoke is right of center, just off the mainland and within
the barrier islands. Directly west, on the point where the
Roanoke and Chowan rivers join, is a (barely visible) paper
patch. When lit from behind, a red fort is clearly visible
beneath the patch, suggesting that the Roanoke colonists
may already have identiﬁed a settlement site there: when he
left the colony, John White wrote that the remaining colonists
“were prepared to remove from Roanoak 50 miles into the
maine[land].” Archaeologists and historians plan to use this
discovery to guide further explorations in the area. The Art
Archive at Art Resource, NY.

