CHAPTER 2

  American Experiments, 1521–1700

49

John Smith and Opechancanough

The powerful Indian warrior Opechancanough
towers over English explorer John Smith in this
engraving. In December 1607, Smith led a party
of Jamestown colonists upriver in search of
Indian food supplies. Two hundred warriors
intercepted them, captured Smith, and took him
to the Powhatan village of Werowacomoco. It
was on this occasion that Pocahontas suppos-
edly interceded to save his life (see Thinking Like
a Historian, p. 50). The note at the bottom of
the engraving is doubly mistaken, as it was
Opechancanough (not Powhatan) who took
Smith captive. Library of Congress.

38 of the 120 men were alive nine months later. Death
rates  remained  high:  by  1611,  the  Virginia  Company
had dispatched 1,200 colonists to Jamestown, but fewer
than half remained alive. “Our men were destroyed with
cruell  diseases,  as  Swellings,  Fluxes,  Burning  Fevers,
and by warres,” reported one of the settlement’s leaders,
“but for the most part they died of meere famine.”

Their plan to dominate the local Indian population
ran up against the presence of Powhatan, the powerful
chief  who  oversaw  some  thirty  tribal  chiefdoms
between the James and Potomac rivers. He was willing
to treat the English traders as potential allies who could
provide valuable goods, but — just as the Englishmen
expected
Indians — Powhatan
expected  tribute  from  the  English.  He  provided  the
hungry  English  adventurers  with  corn;  in  return,  he
demanded  “hatchets . . . bells,  beads,  and  copper”  as
well  as  “two  great  guns”  and  expected  Jamestown  to
become a dependent community within his chiefdom.
Subsequently, Powhatan arranged a marriage between

tribute

from

the

his  daughter  Pocahontas  and  John  Rolfe,  an  English
colonist (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 50). But these
tactics  failed.  The  inability  to  decide  who  would  pay
tribute to whom led to more than a decade of uneasy
relations, followed by a long era of ruinous warfare.

The war was precipitated by the discovery of a cash
crop  that — like  sugar  in  Brazil — offered  colonists  a
way to turn a profit but required steady expansion onto
Indian  lands.  Tobacco  was  a  plant  native  to  the
Americas,  long  used  by  Indians  as  a  medicine  and  a
stimulant. John Rolfe found a West Indian strain that
could  flourish  in  Virginia  soil  and  produced  a  small
crop — “pleasant,  sweet,  and  strong” — that  fetched  a
high  price  in  England  and  spurred  the  migration  of
thousands  of  new  settlers.  The  English  soon  came  to
crave the nicotine that tobacco contained. James I ini-
tially  condemned  the  plant  as  a  “vile  Weed”  whose
“black stinking fumes” were “baleful to the nose, harm-
ful to the brain, and dangerous to the lungs.” But the
king’s  attitude  changed  as  taxes  on  imported  tobacco

