T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Who Was Pocahontas?

Matoaka — nicknamed  Pocahontas — was  born  around  1596  in  the  region  the
English would soon name Virginia. A daughter of Chief Powhatan, her interac-
tions  with  colonists  were  important  at  the  time  and  have  been  mythologized
ever  since.  Pocahontas  left  no  writings,  so  what  we  know  of  her  comes  from
others.  From  these  accounts,  we  know  that  she  acted  as  a  mediator  with  the
Jamestown settlers; she was the ﬁrst Native American to marry an Englishman;
and she traveled to England with her husband and son.  Pocahontas fell ill and
died in Gravesend, England, in June 1617.

1.  John Smith, Generall Historie of Virginia, 1624.

Smith’s description of being a captive of Powhatan
in 1607.

Having feasted [Smith] after their best barbarous manner
they could, a long consultation was held, but the conclu-
sion was, two great stones were brought before Powhatan:
then as many as could layd hands on him, dragged him to
them, and thereon laid his head, and being ready with
their clubs, to beate out his braines, Pocahontas the Kings
dearest daughter, when no entreaty could prevaile, got his
head in her armes, and laid her owne upon his to save
him from death: whereat the Emperour was contented he
should live to make him hatchets, and her bells, beads,
and copper.

2.  Robert Vaughn’s engraving of Pocahontas saving

Smith’s life, from John Smith’s Generall Historie of
Virginia, 1624.

Source: © British Library Board / Robana / Art Resource, NY.

50

3.  John Smith, Generall Historie of Virginia, 1624.
Pocahontas visited Jamestown regularly in the
years following Smith’s capture. Smith returned to
England in 1609; four years later Captain Samuel
Argall kidnapped Pocahontas and held her captive
in Jamestown.

[S]he too James towne [was brought.] A messenger
forthwith was sent to her father, that his daughter
 Pocahontas he loved so dearely, he must ransome with
our men, swords, peeces, tooles, &c. he treacherously had
stolen. . . . [H]e . . . sent us word, that when we would
deliver his daughter, he would make us satisfaction for all
injuries done to us, and give us five hundred bushels of
Corne, and for ever be friends with us. . . . [W]e could
not believe the rest of our armes were either lost or stolen
from him, and therefore till he sent them, we would keep
his daughter. . . . [W]e heard no more from him a long
time after. . . . .

[Long before this, Master John Rolfe, an honest
Gentle man of good behavior had been in love with
 Pocahontas, and she with him. . . . T]his marriage came
soone to the knowledge of Powhatan, a thing acceptable
to him, as appeared by his sudden consent, for within ten
daies he sent Opachisco, an old Uncle of hers, and two of
his sons, to see the manner of the marriage, and to do
in that behalf what they were requested . . . which was
 accordingly done about the first of April: And ever since
we have had friendly trade and commerce.

4.  John Rolfe, Letter to Sir Thomas Dale, 1614.

Pocahontas and John Rolfe married in April 1614.
In June, Rolfe defended his motives in this letter to
Virginia’s deputy-governor.

I freely subject my selfe to your grave and mature judg-
ment, deliberation, approbation and determination. . . .
[I am not led by] the unbridled desire of carnal affection:
but for the good of this plantation, for the honour of our
countrie, for the glory of God, for my owne salvation, and
for the converting to the true knowledge of God and Jesus

