Christ, an unbeleeving creature, namely Pocahontas. To
whom my hartie and best thoughts are, and have [for] a
long time bin so intangled, and inthralled in so intricate a
labyrinth, that I was even awearied to unwinde my selfe
thereout. . . . [I have often thought]: surely these are
wicked instigations, hatched by him who seeketh and
delighteth in man’s destruction[.]

I say the holy spirit of God has often demanded of
me, why I was created . . . but to labour in the Lord’s vine-
yard. . . . Likewise adding hereunto her great appearance
of love to me, her desire to be taught and instructed in the
knowledge of God, her capableness of understanding, her
aptness and willingness to receive any good impression,
and also the spirituall, besides her owne incitements stir-
ring me up hereunto. . . .

Now if the vulgar sort, who square all men’s actions by
the base rule of their owne filthiness, shall tax or taunt me
in this my godly labour: let them know, it is not any hun-
gry appetite, to gorge my selfe with incontinency; sure (if
I would, and were so sensually inclined) I might satisfy
such desire, though not without a seared conscience.

5.  Portrait of Pocahontas by Simon Van De Pass,

1616. In 1616, the Virginia Company of London
sent Pocahontas, John Rolfe, and their son Thomas
to England, where she met King James and
sat for this portrait, the only surviving image
of Pocahontas.

Source: National Portrait Gallery, Smithsonian Institution/
Art Resource, NY.

6.  John Smith, Generall Historie of Virginia, 1624. In
1624, John Smith recalled a meeting he had with
Pocahontas during her 1616 tour of England.

[H]earing shee was at Branford with divers of my friends,
I went to see her: After a modest salutation, without any
word, she turned about, obscured her face, as not seeming
well contented; and in that humour her husband, with
divers others, we all left her two or three houres. . . . But
not long after, she began to talke, and remembred mee
well what courtesies she had done: saying, [“]You did
promise Powhatan what was yours should bee his, and he
the like to you; you called him father being in his land a
stranger, and by the same reason so must I doe you:[”]
which though I would have excused, I durst not allow of
that title, because she was a Kings daughter; with a well
set countenance she said, [“]Were you not afraid to come
into my fathers Countrie, and caused feare in him and all
his people (but mee) and feare you here I should call you
father; I tell you then I will, and you shall call mee childe,
and so I will bee for ever and ever your Countrieman.
They did tell us [always] you were dead, and I knew no
other till I came to [Plymouth]; yet Powhatan did com-
mand Uttamatomakkin to seeke you, and know the truth,
because your Countriemen will lie much.[”]

Sources: (1, 3, 6) John Smith, Generall Historie of Virginia (Glasgow: James MacLehose
and Sons, 1907), 101, 218, 220, 238–239; (4) J. Franklin Jameson, Narratives of Early
Virginia (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1907), 237–244.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Most historians now believe that the event described
and shown in sources 1 and 2 was a Powhatan ritual
to make Smith an ally and that his life was not actually
in danger. What elements of these sources suggest the
validity of this interpretation? Why would Pocahontas —
a child of eleven or twelve at the time — have had a role
in such a ritual?

2.  How does Vaughn (source 2) depict power relations and
social hierarchy among the Powhatans? Where does
Pocahontas ﬁt within this hierarchy? What messages
about Pocahontas do you think Van De Pass (source 5)
intended to convey? How do these images contribute to
the Pocahontas myth?

3.  How does Rolfe explain his interest in Pocahontas

(source 4)? What is his view of her? How do you inter-
pret the letter?

4.  Assess the reliability of sources 1, 3, and 6 and consider
Smith’s motive in including them in his Historie. Source
6 purports to record an actual conversation between
Pocahontas and Smith. What is the tone of this encoun-
ter, and what might explain Pocahontas’s remarks?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Imagine the various encounters Pocahontas experienced
with the Jamestown Englishmen from her point of view.
Reﬂect on who Pocahontas was as described in these docu-
ments — savior and friend, captive, baptized wife, Virginia
Company prize, and betrayed ally — and in a brief essay, use
Pocahontas’s experience to explore the uncertain nature of
English-Powhatan relations in the ﬁrst decade of contact.

51

