52

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

bolstered the royal treasury. Powhatan, however, now
accused  the  English  of  coming  “not  to  trade  but  to
invade my people and possess my country.”

To  foster  the  flow  of  migrants,  the  Virginia
Company  allowed  individual  settlers  to  own  land,
granting 100 acres to every freeman and more to those
who  imported  servants.  The  company  also  created  a
system  of  representative  government:  the  House  of
Burgesses, first convened in 1619, could make laws and
levy  taxes,  although  the  governor  and  the  company
council in England could veto its acts. By 1622, land-
ownership,  self-government,  and  a  judicial  system
based  on  “the  lawes  of  the  realme  of  England”  had
attracted  some  4,500  new  recruits.  To  encourage  the
transition  to  a  settler  colony,  the  Virginia  Company
recruited dozens of “Maides young and uncorrupt to
make wifes to the Inhabitants.”

The  Indian  War  of  1622  The  influx  of  migrants
sparked  an  all-out  conflict  with  the  neighboring
Indians.  The  struggle  began  with  an  assault  led  by
Opechancanough,  Powhatan’s  younger  brother  and
successor.  In  1607,  Opechancanough  had  attacked
some  of  the  first  English  invaders;  subsequently,  he
“stood aloof ” from the English settlers and “would not
be  drawn  to  any  Treaty.”  In  particular,  he  resisted
English proposals to place Indian children in schools
to be “brought upp in Christianytie.” Upon becoming
the  paramount  chief  in  1621,  Opechancanough  told
the  leader  of  the  neighboring  Potomack  Indians:
“Before the end of two moons, there should not be an
Englishman in all their Countries.”

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the proximity of
the Powhatan Chiefdom
affect developments in
early Virginia?

Opechancanough  almost  succeeded.  In  1622,  he
coordinated  a  surprise  attack  by  twelve  Indian  chief-
doms that killed 347 English settlers, nearly one-third
of  the  population.  The  English
fought  back  by  seizing  the  fields
and  food  of  those  they  now
called  “naked,  tanned,  deformed
Savages”  and  declared  “a  per-
petual  war  without  peace  or
truce”  that  lasted  for  a  decade.
They  sold  captured  warriors
into slavery, “destroy[ing] them who sought to destroy
us” and taking control of “their cultivated places.”

Shocked  by  the  Indian  uprising,  James  I  revoked
the  Virginia  Company’s  charter  and,  in  1624,  made
Virginia a royal colony. Now the king and his ministers
appointed the governor and a small advisory council,
retaining  the  locally  elected  House  of  Burgesses  but
stipulating that the king’s Privy Council (a committee
of political advisors) must ratify all legislation. The king

also decreed the legal establishment of the Church of
England in the colony, which meant that residents had
to pay taxes to support its clergy. These institutions —
an appointed governor, an elected assembly, a formal
legal  system,  and  an  established  Anglican  Church —
became  the  model  for  royal  colonies  throughout
English America.

Lord Baltimore Settles Catholics in Maryland  A
second  tobacco-growing  colony  developed  in  neigh-
boring  Maryland.  King  Charles  I  (r.  1625–1649),
James’s  successor,  was  secretly  sympathetic  toward
Catholicism, and in 1632 he granted lands bordering
the vast Chesapeake Bay to Catholic aristocrat Cecilius
Calvert, Lord Baltimore. Thus Maryland became a ref-
uge for Catholics, who were subject to persecution in
England. In 1634, twenty gentlemen, mostly Catholics,
and  200  artisans  and  laborers,  mostly  Protestants,
established St. Mary’s City at the mouth of the Potomac
River. To minimize religious confrontations, the pro-
prietor  instructed  the  governor  to  allow  “no  scandall
nor offence to be given to any of the Protestants” and to
“cause All Acts of Romane Catholicque Religion to be
done as privately as may be.”

Maryland  grew  quickly  because  Baltimore
imported  many  artisans  and  offered  ample  lands  to
wealthy migrants. But political conflict threatened the
colony’s stability. Disputing Baltimore’s powers, settlers
elected  a  representative  assembly  and  insisted  on  the
right  to  initiate  legislation,  which  Baltimore  grudg-
ingly  granted.  Anti-Catholic  agitation  by  Protestants
also  threatened  his  religious  goals.  To  protect  his
co religionists, Lord Baltimore persuaded the assembly
to enact the Toleration Act (1649), which granted all
Christians  the  right  to  follow  their  beliefs  and  hold
church services. In Maryland, as in Virginia, tobacco
quickly  became  the  main  crop,  and  that  similarity,
rather  than  any  religious  difference,  ultimately  made
the  two  colonies  very  much  alike  in  their  economic
and social systems.

The Caribbean Islands
Virginia’s  experiment  with  a  cash  crop  that  created  a
land-intensive plantation society ran parallel to develop-
ments  in  the  Caribbean,  where  English,  French,  and
Dutch  sailors  began  looking  for  a  permanent  toehold.
In  1624,  a  small  English  party  under  the  command
of  Sir  Thomas  Warner  established  a  settlement  on
St. Christopher (St. Kitts). A year later, Warner allowed a
French group to settle the other end of the island so they
could  better  defend  their  position  from  the  Spanish.

