CHAPTER 2

  American Experiments, 1521–1700

53

A Sugar Mill in the French West Indies, 1655

Making sugar required both hard labor and considerable expertise. Field slaves labored strenuously in the hot
tropical sun to cut the sugarcane and carry or cart it to an oxen- or wind-powered mill, where it was pressed
to yield the juice. Then skilled slave artisans took over. They carefully heated the juice and, at the proper
moment, added ingredients that granulated the sugar and separated it from the molasses, which was later
distilled into rum. The Granger Collection, New York.

Within a few years, the English and French colonists on
St.  Kitts  had  driven  the  native  Caribs  from  the  island,
weathered a Spanish attack, and created a common set
of bylaws for mutual occupation of the island.

After St. Kitts, a dozen or so colonies were founded
in the Lesser Antilles, including the French islands of
Martinique,  Guadeloupe,  and  St.  Bart’s;  the  English
outposts  of  Nevis,  Antigua,  Montserrat,  Anguilla,
Tortola,  and  Barbados;  and  the  Dutch  colony  of  St.
Eustatius. In 1655, an English fleet captured the Spanish
island  of  Jamaica — one  of  the  large  islands  of  the
Greater Antilles — and opened it to settlement as well.
A  few  of  these  islands  were  unpopulated  before
Europeans settled there; elsewhere, native populations
were displaced, and often wiped out, within a decade
or  so.  Only  on  the  largest  islands  did  native  popula-
tions hold out longer.

Colonists experimented with a wide variety of cash
crops,  including  tobacco,  indigo,  cotton,  cacao,  and
ginger. Beginning in the 1640s — and drawing on the
example  of  Brazil — planters  on  many  of  the  islands
shifted  to  sugar  cultivation.  Where  conditions  were
right,  as  they  were  in  Barbados,  Jamaica,  Nevis,  and
Martinique, these colonies were soon producing sub-
stantial crops of sugar and, as a consequence, claimed
some of the world’s most valuable real estate.

Plantation Life
In North America and the Caribbean, plantations were
initially small freeholds, farms of 30 to 50 acres owned
and farmed by families or male partners. But the logic
of  plantation  agriculture  soon  encouraged  consolida-
tion:  large  planters  engrossed  as  much  land  as  they

