54

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

could and experimented with new forms of labor disci-
pline that maximized their control over production. In
Virginia, the headright system guaranteed 50 acres of
land to anyone who paid the passage of a new immi-
grant to the colony; thus, by buying additional inden-
tured servants and slaves, the colony’s largest planters
also amassed ever-greater claims to land.

European demand for tobacco set off a forty-year
economic boom in the Chesapeake. “All our riches for
the present do consist in tobacco,” a planter remarked
in 1630. Exports rose from 3 million pounds in 1640
to  10  million  pounds  in  1660.  After  1650,  wealthy
migrants  from  gentry  or  noble  families  established
large estates along the coastal rivers. Coming primarily
from southern England, where tenants and wage labor-
ers farmed large manors, they copied that hierarchical
system  by  buying  English  indentured  servants  and
enslaved  Africans  to  work  their  lands.  At  about  the
same time, the switch to sugar production in Barbados
caused  the  price  of  land  there  to  quadruple,  driving
small landowners out.

For rich and poor alike, life in the plantation colo-
nies of North America and the Caribbean was harsh.
The scarcity of towns deprived settlers of community
(Map 2.4). Families were equally scarce because there
were few women, and marriages often ended with the
early  death  of  a  spouse.  Pregnant  women  were  espe-
cially vulnerable to malaria, spread by mosquitoes that
flourished  in  tropical  and  subtropical  climates.  Many
mothers  died  after  bearing  a  first  or  second  child,  so
orphaned children (along with unmarried young men)

formed a large segment of the society. Sixty percent of
the  children  born  in  Middlesex  County,  Virginia,
before 1680 lost one or both parents before they were
thirteen. Death was pervasive. Although 15,000 English
migrants arrived in Virginia between 1622 and 1640,
the  population  rose  only  from  2,000  to  8,000.  It  was
even  harsher  in  the  islands,  where  yellow  fever  epi-
demics  killed  indiscriminately.  On  Barbados,  burials
outnumbered baptisms in the second half of the seven-
teenth century by four to one.

Indentured Servitude  Still, the prospect of owning
land  continued  to  lure  settlers.  By  1700,  more  than
100,000  English  migrants  had  come  to  Virginia  and
Maryland and over 200,000 had migrated to the islands
of  the  West  Indies,  principally  to  Barbados;  the  vast
majority  to  both  destinations  traveled  as  indentured
servants  (Figure  2.2).  Shipping  registers  from  the
English port of Bristol reveal the backgrounds of 5,000
servants embarking for the Chesapeake. Three-quarters
were  young  men.  They  came  to  Bristol  searching  for
work;  once  there,  merchants  persuaded  them  to  sign
contracts  to  labor  in  America.  Indentured  servitude
contracts bound the men — and the quarter who were
women — to  work  for  a  master  for  four  or  five  years,
after which they would be free to marry and work for
themselves.

For merchants, servants were valuable cargo: their
contracts  fetched  high  prices  from  Chesapeake  and
West Indian planters. For the plantation owners, inden-
tured  servants  were  a  bargain  if  they  survived  the

Why was Fort West located here
and what was its major function?

Pamunkey River

Mattaponi River

Orapax

Fort West

Arrohateck

Falling
Creek

Chickahominy River
PO

W

H

Henrico

Bermuda
Hundred

Shirley Hundred

Berkeley Hundred

Appamatuck

Flowerdew
Hundred

Martin‘s
Brandon

Note the lack of roads and the
dependence of the settlements
on river transportation. Why
was river transport particularly
important for the tobacco trade?

0

0

10

20 miles

10

20 kilometers

N

S

E

W

Chesapeake
Bay

Note the location of the Indian villages.
How do you explain their position in
relation to the English settlements?

Rappahannock River

Machot

Werowacomoco

A

T

A

N
Smith‘s Hundred

York River

Jamestown

James
Smith‘s
Fort

Lawnes
Plantation

Riv
er

Martin‘s
Hundred

Use the scale of miles to estimate the
distance between Jamestown and the
outlying settlements (or Hundreds).
What does this suggest about the
nature of early Virginia society?

Dale‘s Gift

Cape Charles

Point Comfort

Kecoughtan

Hampton
Roads

Fort
Algernon

Smith Is.
ATLANTIC
OCEAN

English settlement
English fort
Indian village
Fresh-salt
transition zone

MAP 2.4
River Plantations in Virginia, c. 1640

The ﬁrst migrants settled in widely
dispersed plantations along the James
River, a settlement pattern promoted
by the tobacco economy. From
their riverfront plantations wealthy
planter-merchants could easily load
heavy hogsheads of tobacco onto
oceangoing ships and ofﬂoad supplies
that they then sold to smallholding
planters. Consequently, few substantial
towns or trading centers developed in
the Chesapeake region.

