White
population

White
labor force

White servant
population

90,000

70,000

50,000

30,000

10,000

75
30

66

27

58

17

46% of white

    population
    in labor
    force

10

% of labor
    force

1640

1660

1680

1700

FIGURE 2.2
Chesapeake Whites: Workers, Dependents, and
Indentured Servants, 1640–1700

The Chesapeake’s white population grew tenfold in the
years after 1640, and it also changed signiﬁcantly in
character. As more women migrated to Virginia and
Maryland and bore children, the percentage of the
population who worked in the ﬁelds daily fell dramati-
cally, from 75 percent to 46 percent. The proportion of
indentured servants in the labor force likewise declined,
from 30 percent to 10 percent.

voyage  and  their  first  year  in  a  harsh  new  disease
environment, a process called “seasoning.” During the
Chesapeake’s tobacco boom, a male servant could pro-
duce  five  times  his  purchase  price  in  a  single  year.
To  maximize  their  gains,  many  masters  ruthlessly
exploited  servants,  forcing  them  to  work  long  hours,
beating them without cause, and withholding permis-
sion  to  marry.  If  servants  ran  away  or  became  preg-
nant,  masters  went  to  court  to  increase  the  term  of
their service. Female servants were especially vulner-
able to abuse. A Virginia law of 1692 stated that “disso-
lute masters have gotten their maids with child; and yet
claim  the  benefit  of  their  service.”  Planters  got  rid  of
uncooperative  servants  by  selling  their  contracts.  In
Virginia, an Englishman remarked in disgust that “ser-
vants were sold up and down like horses.”

Few  indentured  servants  escaped  poverty.  In  the
Chesapeake, half the men died before completing the
term of their contract, and another quarter remained
landless.  Only  one-quarter  achieved  their  quest  for
property and respectability. Female servants generally
fared better. Because men had grown “very sensible of
the  Misfortune  of  Wanting  Wives,”  many  propertied
planters  married  female  servants.  Thus  a  few — very

CHAPTER 2

  American Experiments, 1521–1700

55

fortunate — men and women escaped a life of landless
poverty.

African  Laborers  The  rigors  of  indentured  servi-
tude  paled  before  the  brutality  that  accompanied  the
large-scale  shift  to  African  slave  labor.  In  Barbados
and  the  other  English  islands,  sugar  production
devoured  laborers,  and  the  sup-
ply of indentured servants quickly
became  inadequate  to  planters’
needs.  By  1690,  blacks  outnum-
bered  whites  on  Barbados  nearly
three  to  one,  and  white  slave
owners  were  developing  a  code
of  force  and  terror  to  keep  sugar
flowing  and  maintain  control  of
that  sur-
the  black  majority
rounded them. The first comprehensive slave legislation
for the island, adopted in 1661, was called an “Act for
the better ordering and governing of Negroes.”

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How were the experiences
of indentured servants and
slaves in the Chesapeake
and the Caribbean similar?
In what ways were they
different?

In the Chesapeake, the shift to slave labor was more
gradual. In 1619, John Rolfe noted that “a Dutch man
of warre . . . sold us twenty Negars” — slaves originally
shipped by the Portuguese from the port of Luanda in
Angola.  For  a  generation,  the  number  of  Africans
remained  small.  About  400  Africans  lived  in  the
Chesapeake colonies in 1649, just 2 percent of the pop-
ulation.  By  1670,  that  figure  had  reached  5  percent.
Most  Africans  served  their  English  masters  for  life.
However, since English common law did not acknowl-
edge chattel slavery, it was possible for some Africans
to  escape  bondage.  Some  were  freed  as  a  result  of
Christian  baptism;  some  purchased  their  freedom
from  their owners;  some — like  Elizabeth  Key,  whose
story was related at the beginning of the chapter — won
their freedom in the courts. Once free, some ambitious
Africans became landowners and purchased slaves or
the labor contracts of English servants for themselves.
Social  mobility  for  Africans  ended  in  the  1660s
with the collapse of the tobacco boom and the increas-
ing  political  power  of  the  gentry.  Tobacco  had  once
sold for 30 pence a pound; now it fetched less than one-
tenth  of  that.  The  “low  price  of  Tobacco  requires  it
should  bee  made  as  cheap  as  possible,”  declared
Virginia  planter-politician  Nicholas  Spencer,  and
“blacks  can  make  it  cheaper  than  whites.”  As  they
imported  more  African  workers,  the  English-born
political elite grew more race-conscious. Increasingly,
Spencer  and  other  leading  legislators  distinguished
English from African residents by color (white-black)
rather than by religion (Christian-pagan). By 1671, the
Virginia House of Burgesses had forbidden Africans to

