56

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

own guns or join the militia. It also barred them — “tho
baptized  and  enjoying  their  own  Freedom” — from
owning English servants. Being black was increasingly
a  mark  of  inferior  legal  status,  and  slavery  was  fast
becoming  a  permanent  and  hereditary  condition.  As
an  English  clergyman  observed,  “These  two  words,
Negro and Slave had by custom grown Homogeneous
and convertible.”

Neo-European Colonies
While  Mesoamerica  and  the  Andes  emerged  at  the
heart of a tribute-based empire in Latin America, and
tropical  and  subtropical  environments  were  trans-
formed  into  plantation  societies,  a  series  of  colonies
that more closely replicated European patterns of eco-
nomic and social organization developed in the tem-
perate  zone  along  North  America’s  Atlantic  coast
(America  Compared,  opposite  page).  Dutch,  French,
and  English  sailors  probed  the  continent’s  northern
coastline,  initially  searching  for  a  Northwest  Passage
through the continent to Asia. Gradually, they devel-
oped an interest in the region on its own terms. They
traded for furs with coastal Native American popula-
tions, fished for cod on the Grand Banks off the coast
of  New foundland,  and  established  freehold  family
farms and larger manors where they reproduced Euro-
pean patterns of agricultural life. Many migrants also
came  with  aspirations  to  create  godly  communities,
places of refuge where they could put religious ideals
into practice. New France, New Netherland, and New
England were the three pillars of neo-European coloni-
zation in the early seventeenth century.

New France
In the 1530s, Jacques Cartier ventured up the St. Law-
rence River and claimed it for France. Cartier’s claim
to the St. Lawrence languished for three-quarters of a
century,  but  in  1608  Samuel  de  Champlain  returned
and  founded  the  fur-trading  post  of  Quebec.  Trade
with  the  Cree-speaking  Montagnais;  Algonquian-
speaking  Micmacs,  Ottawas,  and  Ojibwas;  and
Iroquois-speaking  Hurons  gave  the  French  access  to
furs — mink,  otter,  and  beaver — that  were  in  great
demand in Europe. To secure plush beaver pelts from
the  Hurons,  who  controlled  trade  north  of  the  Great
Lakes, Champlain provided them with manufactured
goods.  Selling  pelts,  an  Indian  told  a  French  priest,
“makes kettles, hatchets, swords, knives, bread.” It also
made guns, which Champlain sold to the Hurons.

The Hurons also became the first focus of French
Catholic missionary activity. Hundreds of priests, most
of them Jesuits, fanned out to live in Indian communi-
ties.  They  mastered  Indian  languages  and  came  to
understand, and sometimes respect, their values. Many
Indian  peoples  initially  welcomed  the  French  “Black
Robes” as spiritually powerful beings, but when prayers
to the Christian god did not protect them from disease,
the Indians grew skeptical. A Peoria chief charged that
a priest’s “fables are good only in his own country; we
have our own [beliefs], which do not make us die as his
do.”  When  a  drought  struck,  Indians  blamed  the
missionaries. “If you cannot make rain, they speak of
nothing  less  than  making  away  with  you,”  lamented
one Jesuit.

While New France became an expansive center of
fur  trading  and  missionary  work,  it  languished  as  a

The Fur Trade

Luxuriant pelts like ermine and silver fox
were always desirable, but the humble
beaver dominated the early trade
between Europeans and Indians in the
Northeast. It had thick, coarse hair,
but beneath that outer layer was soft
“underfur.” Those ﬁne hairs were
covered in microscopic barbs that
allowed them to mat into a dense mass.
European hatmakers pressed this fur
into felt so strong and pliable that even
broad-brimmed hats would hold their
shape. As such hats became fashionable
in Europe and the colonies, beavers were
hunted to near-extinction in North
America. National Archives of Canada.

