A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Plantation Colonies

Versus Neo-Europes

The prospects for Europeans who traveled to tropical plantations like Barbados
differed dramatically from those traveling to neo-European colonies like Mas-
sachusetts  Bay.  In  the  former,  planters  employed  small  armies  of  servants  and
slaves; in the latter, the ﬁrst generation of colonists worked hard, often in cold
climates and rocky soils, to eke out a living.

Henry Whistler’s Journal, 1655

This Island [Barbados] is one of the Richest Spots of
ground in the world and fully inhabited. . . . The gentry
here doth Hue [appear] far better than ours do in En-
gland : they have most of them 100 or 2 or 3 of slaves[,]
apes who they command as they please. . . . This Island
is inhabited with all sorts : with English, French, Dutch,
Scots, Irish, Spaniards they being Jews : with Indians and
miserable Negroes borne to perpetual slavery they and
their seed : these Negroes they do allow as many wives as
they will have, some will have 3 or 4, according as they
find their body able : our English here doth think a negro
child the first day it is born to be worth £5, they cost them
nothing the bringing up, they go all ways naked : some
planters will have 30 more or les about 4 or 5 years old :
they sell them from one to the other as we do sheep. This
Island is the Dunghill whereon England doth cast forth
its rubbish. . . . A rogue in England will hardly make a
cheater here : a Bawd brought over puts on a demure
comportment, a whore if handsome makes a wife for
some rich planter.

Source: The Narrative of General Venables (New York: Longmans, Green, and Co.,
1900), 145–146.

William Wood, New England’s Prospect, 1634

But it may be objected that it is too cold a country for our
English men, who have been accustomed to a warmer cli-
mate. To which it may be answered . . . , there is wood

good store and better cheap to build warm houses and
make good fires, which makes the winter less tedious. . . .
[T]rue it is that some venturing too nakedly in extremity
of cold, being more foolhardy than wise, have for a time
lost the use of their feet, others the use of their fingers;
but time and surgery afterwards recovered them. Some
have had their overgrown beards so frozen together that
they could not get their strong-water bottles into their
mouths. . . . [W]hereas many do disparage the land, say-
ing a man cannot live without labor, in that they more
disparage and discredit themselves in giving the world
occasion to take notice of their dronish disposition that
would live off the sweat of another man’s brows. . . .
For all in New England must be workers of some
kind. . . . And howsoever they are accounted poor,
they are well contented and look not so much at
abundance as at competency.

Source: William Wood, New England’s Prospect (Boston: The University of Massachu-
setts Press, 1993), 28–29, 68.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Henry Whistler was a soldier who brieﬂy visited Barbados
on a military expedition to the West Indies, while William
Wood lived for four years in Massachusetts Bay. How
might that difference inﬂuence the tone of these two
descriptions?

2.  What core values does each author ascribe to the colony
he writes about? What kinds of people are most likely to
end up in each of these two colonies?

farming settlement. In 1662, King Louis XIV (r. 1643–
1714)  turned  New  France  into  a  royal  colony  and
subsidized  the  migration  of  indentured  servants.
French servants labored under contract for three years,
received a salary, and could eventually lease a farm — far
more  generous  terms  than  those  for  indentured  ser-
vants in the English colonies.

Nonetheless,  few  people  moved  to  New  France,
a  cold  and  forbidding  country  “at  the  end  of  the
world,” as one migrant put it. And some state policies

discouraged migration. Louis XIV drafted tens of thou-
sands  of  men  into  military  service  and  barred
Huguenots (French Calvinist Protestants) from migrat-
ing  to  New  France,  fearing  they  might  win  converts
and take control of the colony. Moreover, the French
legal system gave peasants strong rights to their village
lands,  whereas  migrants  to  New  France  faced  an
oppressive, aristocracy- and church-dominated feudal
system.  In  the  village  of  Saint  Ours  in  Quebec,  for
example, peasants paid 45 percent of their wheat crop

57

