58

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

to  nobles  and  the  Catholic  Church.  By  1698,  only
15,200  Europeans  lived  in  New  France,  compared  to
100,000 in England’s North American colonies.

Despite  this  small  population,  France  eventually
claimed a vast inland arc, from the St. Lawrence Valley
through the Great Lakes and down the course of the
Ohio and Mississippi rivers. Explorers and fur traders
drove  this  expansion.  In  1673,  Jacques  Marquette
reached the Mississippi River in present-day Wisconsin;
then,  in  1681,  Robert  de  La  Salle  traveled  down  the
majestic river  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  To  honor  Louis
XIV,  La  Salle  named  the  region  Louisiana.  By  1718,
French  merchants  had  founded  the  port  of  New
Orleans at the mouth of the Mississippi. Eventually a
network of about two dozen forts grew up in the Great
Lakes and Mississippi. Soldiers and missionaries used
them as bases of operations, while Indians, traders, and
their  métis  (mixed-race)  offspring  created  trading
communities alongside them.

New Netherland
By  1600,  Amsterdam  had  become  the  financial  and
commercial hub of northern Europe, and Dutch finan-
ciers dominated the European banking, insurance, and
textile industries. Dutch merchants owned more ships
and  employed  more  sailors  than  did  the  combined
fleets of England, France, and Spain. Indeed, the Dutch
managed much of the world’s commerce. During their
struggle  for  independence  from  Spain  and  Portugal

(ruled  by  Spanish  monarchs,  1580–1640),  the  Dutch
seized  Portuguese  forts  in  Africa  and  Indonesia  and
sugar  plantations  in  Brazil.  These  conquests  gave  the
Dutch control of the Atlantic trade in slaves and sugar
and the Indian Ocean commerce in East Indian spices
and Chinese silks and ceramics (Map 2.5).

In 1609, Dutch merchants dispatched the English
mariner Henry Hudson to locate a navigable route to
the  riches  of  the  East  Indies.  What  he  found  as  he
probed  the  rivers  of  northeast  America  was  a  fur
bonanza. Following Hudson’s exploration of the river
that  now  bears  his  name,  the  merchants  built  Fort
Orange  (Albany)  in  1614  to  trade  for  furs  with  the
Munsee and Iroquois Indians. Then, in 1621, the Dutch
government chartered the West India Company, which
founded  the  colony  of  New  Netherland,  set  up  New
Amsterdam (on Manhattan Island) as its capital, and
brought in farmers and artisans to make the enterprise
self-sustaining.  The  new  colony  did  not  thrive.  The
population  of  the  Dutch  Republic  was  too  small  to
support  much  emigration — just  1.5  million  people,
compared  to  5  million  in  Britain  and  20  million  in
France — and  its  migrants  sought  riches  in  Southeast
Asia  rather  than  fur-trading  profits  in  America.  To
protect  its  colony  from  rival  European  nations,  the
West  India  Company  granted  huge  estates  along  the
Hudson River to wealthy Dutchmen who promised to
populate them. But by 1664, New Netherland had only
5,000  residents,  and  fewer  than  half  of  them  were
Dutch.

New Amsterdam, c. 1640

As the wooden palisade suggests,
New Amsterdam was a fortlike
trading post at the edge of a vast
land populated by alien Indian
peoples feared by the Dutch. The
city was also a pale miniature
imitation of Amsterdam, with its
many canals. The ﬁrst settlers built
their houses in the Dutch style, with
gable ends facing the street (note
the two middle houses), and
excavated a canal across lower
Manhattan Island (New York City’s
Canal Street today). Library of
Congress.

