CHAPTER 2

  American Experiments, 1521–1700

59

ARCTIC  O CEA N

NETHERLANDS

Fish,
pottery

Wheat, timber,
fur, tar, pitch

NORTH AME RICA

PORTUGAL
Tools, cloth

A TL AN TI C
O CEA N

Silk, sugar, gold, molasses

Lisbon

Seville

FLORIDA

CUBA

HAITI

Silk

Silver

NEW
SPAIN
Mexico
City

Acapulco

Silk

W

N

S

E

Veracruz

Curaçao
(Neth.)

PUERTO RICO

JAMAICA

Cartagena

Panama

SPANISH

MAIN GUIANA

Slaves

r
a
g
u
S

Slaves

CAPE
VERDE

GOLD
COAST

AF RI C A

NEW
GRANADA

Lima
PERU

Bahia

SOUTH
AMER ICA

PACIFIC OCEAN

BRAZIL

Slaves

Mombasa

Luanda

Slaves

ANGOLA

Amsterdam
EURO PE
Venice

Madrid
SPAIN
Tools, cloth

Slaves

Constantinople

ASIA

Tripoli
Alexandria

Cairo

ARABIA

Slaves

Red   Sea
Slaves

Rugs
PERSIA

Ormuz

INDIA

GUJARAT

CHINA
Porcelain,
silk

Ningbo

Canton

Macao

JAPAN
Silver

Silk

Nagasaki

PACIFIC
OCEAN
Silver

Manila
PHILIPPINES

Goa

Slaves
Ceylon

Aden

Arabian
Sea

Ivory, gold, slaves
Pepper, cloth
Cowrie shells

Slaves

Sumatra

Malacca

Borneo

MOLUCCAS

I N D O N E S I A
Java

NEW
GUINEA

Mozambique

Sofala

MADAGASCAR

Rio de Janeiro

Spices
Spices

Cape
Town

MAURITIUS
(NETH.)

AUSTRALIA

IND IAN OCE AN

Strait of Magellan

Cape Horn

0

0

1,000

2,000 miles

1,000 2,000 kilometers

Main Eurasian Trade Routes, 1650

European-Controlled Areas

Portuguese trade routes
Spanish trade routes
Dutch trade routes
Other major trade routes

Portuguese control
Spanish control
Dutch control

MAP 2.5
The Eurasian Trade System and European Spheres of Influence, 1650

Between 1550 and 1650, Spanish, Portuguese, and Dutch merchants took control of the maritime
trade routes between Europe and India, Indonesia, and China. They also created two new trading
connections. The South Atlantic System carried slaves, sugar, and manufactured goods between
Europe, Africa, and the valuable plantation settlements in Brazil and the Caribbean islands. And
a transpaciﬁc trade carried Spanish American silver to China in exchange for silks, ceramics, and
other manufactures. (To trace long-term changes in trade and empires, see Map 1.4 on p. 24 and
Map 5.1 on p. 154.)

Like New France, New Netherland flourished as a
fur-trading enterprise. Trade with the powerful Iroquois,
though rocky at first, gradually improved. But Dutch
settlers had less respect for their Algonquian-speaking
neighbors.  They  seized  prime  farming  land  from  the
Algonquian  peoples  and  took  over  their  trading  net-
work, which exchanged corn and wampum from Long
Island  for  furs  from  Maine.  In  response,  in  1643  the
Algonquians  launched  attacks  that  nearly  destroyed
the colony. “Almost every place is abandoned,” a settler
lamented,  “whilst  the  Indians  daily  threaten  to  over-
whelm  us.”  To  defeat  the  Algonquians,  the  Dutch
waged  vicious  warfare — maiming,  burning,  and  kill-
ing  hundreds  of  men,  women,  and  children — and
formed  an  alliance  with  the  Mohawks,  who  were  no
less  brutal.  The  grim  progression  of  Euro-Indian

relations — an uneasy welcome, followed by rising ten-
sions and war — afflicted even the Dutch, who had few
designs  on  Indian  lands  or  on  their  “unregenerate”
souls and were only looking to do business.

After  the  crippling  Indian  war,  the  West  India
Company  ignored  New  Netherland  and  expanded
its  profitable  trade  in  African
slaves  and  Brazilian  sugar.  In
New  Amsterdam,  Governor
Peter  Stuyvesant  ruled  in  an
authoritarian  fashion,  rejecting
demands  for  a  representative
system  of  government  and  alienating  the  colony’s
diverse  Dutch,  English,  and  Swedish  residents.  Con-
sequently,  the  residents  of  New  Netherland  offered
little  resistance  when  England  invaded  the  colony  in

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Why did New France and
New Netherland struggle
to attract colonists?

