60

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

1664.  New  Netherland  became  New  York  and  fell
under English control.

The Rise of the Iroquois
Like other native groups decimated by European dis-
eases and warfare, the Five Nations of the Iroquois suf-
fered as a result of colonization, but they were able to
capitalize  on  their  strategic  location  in  central  New
York to dominate the region between the French and
Dutch colonies. Obtaining guns and goods from Dutch
merchants at Fort Orange, Iroquois warriors inflicted
terror on their neighbors. Partly in response to a viru-
lent  smallpox  epidemic  in  1633,  which  cut  their
number  by  one-third,  the  Iroquois  waged  a  series  of
devastating wars against the Hurons (1649), Neutrals
(1651), Eries (1657), and Susquehannocks (1660) — all
Iroquoian-speaking peoples. They razed villages, kill-
ing many residents and taking many more captive. The
conquered Hurons ceased to exist as a distinct people;
survivors trekked westward with displaced Algonquian
peoples  and  formed  a  new  nation,  the  Wyandots.
Iroquois warriors pressed still farther — eastward into
New England, south to the Carolinas, north to Quebec,
and  west  via  the  Great  Lakes  to  the  Mississippi —
dominating Indian groups along the way. Collectively
known as the Beaver Wars, these Iroquois campaigns
dramatically  altered  the  map  of  northeastern  North
America.

Many Iroquois raids came at the expense of French-
allied  Algonquian  Indians,  and  in  the  1660s  New
France committed to all-out war against the Iroquois.
In 1667, the Mohawks were the last of the Five Nations
to  admit  defeat.  As  part  of  the  peace  settlement,  the
Five  Nations  accepted  Jesuit  missionaries  into  their
communities.  A  minority  of  Iroquois — perhaps  20
percent of the population — converted to Catholicism
and moved to the St. Lawrence Valley, where they set-
tled  in  mission  communities  near  Montreal  (where
their descendants still live today).

The Iroquois who remained in New York did not
collapse,  however.  Forging  a  new  alliance  with  the
Englishmen who had taken over New Netherland, they
would continue to be a dominant force in the politics
of the Northeast for generations to come.

New England
In 1620, 102 English Protestants landed at a place they
called  Plymouth,  near  Cape  Cod.  A  decade  later,  a
much  larger  group  began  to  arrive  just  north  of
Plymouth,  in  the  newly  chartered  Massachusetts  Bay

Colony. By 1640, the region had attracted more than
20,000 migrants (Map 2.6). Unlike the early arrivals in
Virginia and Barbados, these were not parties of young
male  adventurers  seeking  their  fortunes  or  bound  to
labor for someone else. They came in family groups to
create  communities  like  the  ones  they  left  behind,
except that they intended to establish them according
to  Protestant  principles,  as  John  Calvin  had  done  in
Geneva.  Their  numbers  were  small  compared  to  the
Caribbean and the Chesapeake, but their balanced sex
ratio and organized approach to community formation
allowed them to multiply quickly. By distributing land
broadly, they built a society of independent farm fami-
lies. And by establishing a “holy commonwealth,” they
gave a moral dimension to American history that sur-
vives today.

The  Pilgrims  The  Pilgrims  were  religious  separat-
ists — Puritans  who  had  left  the  Church  of  England.
When King James I threatened to drive Puritans “out of
the land, or else do worse,” some Puritans chose to live
among Dutch Calvinists in Holland. Subsequently, 35
of these exiles resolved to maintain their English iden-
tity by moving to America. Led by William Bradford
and joined by 67 migrants from England, the Pilgrims
sailed to America aboard the Mayflower. Because they
lacked  a  royal  charter,  they  combined  themselves
“together  into  a  civill  body  politick,”  as  their  leader
explained. This Mayflower Compact used the Puritans’
self-governing religious congregation as the model for
their political structure.

Only half of the first migrant group survived until
spring,  but  thereafter  Plymouth  thrived;  the  cold  cli-
mate inhibited the spread of mosquito-borne disease,
and  the  Pilgrims’  religious  discipline  encouraged  a
strong work ethic. Moreover, a smallpox epidemic in
1618  devastated  the  local  Wampanoags,  minimizing
the  danger  they  posed.  By  1640,  there  were  3,000
settlers in Plymouth. To ensure political stability, they
established representative self-government, broad polit-
ical rights, property ownership, and religious freedom
of conscience.

Meanwhile, England plunged deeper into religious
turmoil.  When  King  Charles  I  repudiated  certain
Protestant  doctrines,  including  the  role  of  grace  in
 salvation,  English  Puritans,  now  powerful  in  Parlia-
ment,  accused  the  king  of  “popery” — of  holding
Catholic beliefs. In 1629, Charles dissolved Parliament,
claimed  the  authority  to  rule  by  “divine  right,”  and
raised  money  through  royal  edicts  and  the  sale  of
monopolies.  When  Charles’s  Archbishop  William
Laud began to purge dissident ministers, thousands of

