CHAPTER 2

  American Experiments, 1521–1700

61

N

W

E

S

ENGLAND

000,02DNALGNEWENOT

000,02SDNALSINAIDNITSEWOT

000,5SEINOLOCEKAEPASEHCOT

ATLANTIC OCEAN

ORIGINS OF MASSACHUSETTS  PURITANS

EAST ANGLIA (Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex,
                                 Hartford counties)

WEST COUNTRY (Wiltshire, Hampshire,

Dorset counties)

YORKSHIRE (Yorkshire, Lincoln counties)

YORKSHIRE

Rowley

Newbury

Ipswich
Cambridge

Hingham
Plymouth

MASSACHUSETTS BAY
AND PLYMOUTH COLONIES

0

0

50

100 miles

50 100 kilometers

Rowley

York

Hull

EAST
ANGLIA

Boston

Hingham

Ipswich

Dedham
Braintree

Cambridge

Chelmsford
Andover Newbury
Salisbury

Exeter

Dartmouth

WEST
COUNTRY

ENGLAND

NEW ENGLAND
1620

MARYLAND
1645

VIRGINIA
1635

BERMUDA
1642

BAHAMAS
1646

ST. CROIX
1625
ST. KITTS
1623

C a r i b b e a n   S e a

NEVIS
1628

BARBADOS
1625

0

0

250

500 miles

250 500 kilometers

MAP 2.6
The Puritan Migration to America, 1620–1640

Forty-ﬁve thousand Puritans left England for America and the West Indies between 1620 and 1640.
About half traveled to the New England colonies of Plymouth, Massachusetts Bay, and Connecticut,
where they created durable societies with deep religious identities. Migrants from the three major
centers of Puritanism in England — Yorkshire, East Anglia, and the West Country — commonly
settled among those from their own region. Often they named American communities after their
English towns of origin and tried to live as they had in Old England. For example, settlers from
Rowley in Yorkshire transplanted their customary system of open-ﬁeld agriculture to Rowley in
Massachusetts Bay.

Puritans — Protestants who did not separate from the
Church of England but hoped to purify it of its cere-
mony and hierarchy — fled to America.

John  Winthrop  and  Massachusetts  Bay  The
Puritan  exodus  began  in  1630  with  the  departure  of
900  migrants  led  by  John  Winthrop,  a  well-educated
country  squire  who  became  the  first  governor  of  the
Massachusetts  Bay  Colony.  Calling  England  morally

corrupt  and  “overburdened  with  people,”  Winthrop
sought  land  for  his  children  and  a  place  in Christian
history for his people. “We must consider that we shall
be as a City upon a Hill,” Winthrop told the migrants.
“The eyes of all people are upon us.” Like the Pilgrims,

To see a longer excerpt of Winthrop’s “City Upon
a Hill” sermon, along with other primary sources
from this period, see Sources for America’s History.

