62

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

the  Puritans  envisioned  a  reformed  Christian  society
with “authority in magistrates, liberty in people, purity
in the church,” as minister John Cotton put it. By their
example,  they  hoped  to  inspire  religious  reform
throughout Christendom.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
What made New England
different from New France
and New Netherland?

Winthrop  and  his  associates  governed
the
Massachusetts  Bay  Colony  from  the  town  of  Boston.
They  transformed  their  joint-stock  corporation — a
commercial  agreement  that  allows  investors  to  pool
their resources — into a representative political system
with  a  governor,  council,  and
assembly.  To  ensure  rule  by  the
godly,  the  Puritans  limited  the
right  to  vote  and  hold  office  to
men  who  were  church  mem-
bers.  Rejecting
the  Plymouth
Colony’s  policy  of  religious  tol-
erance,  the  Massachusetts  Bay  Colony  established
Puritanism  as  the  state-supported  religion,  barred
other  faiths  from  conducting  services,  and  used  the
Bible  as  a  legal  guide.  “Where  there  is  no  Law,”  they
said, magistrates should rule “as near the law of God as
they can.” Over the next decade, about 10,000 Puritans
migrated to the colony, along with 10,000 others flee-
ing hard times in England.

The New England Puritans sought to emulate the
simplicity  of  the  first  Christians.  Seeing  bishops  as
“traitours unto God,” they placed power in the congre-
gation of members — hence the name Congregationalist
for  their  churches.  Inspired  by  John  Calvin,  many
Puritans embraced  predestination, the idea that God
saved  only  a  few  chosen  people.  Church  members
often lived in great anxiety, worried that God had not
placed them among the “elect.” Some hoped for a con-
version experience, the intense sensation of receiving
God’s  grace  and  being  “born  again.”  Other  Puritans
relied on “preparation,” the confidence in salvation that
came  from  spiritual  guidance  by  their  ministers.  Still
others  believed  that  they  were  God’s  chosen  people,
the new Israelites, and would be saved if they obeyed
his laws.

Roger  Williams  and  Rhode  Island  To  maintain
God’s favor, the Massachusetts Bay magistrates purged
their  society  of  religious  dissidents.  One  target  was
Roger  Williams,  the  Puritan  minister  in  Salem,  a
coastal  town  north  of  Boston.  Williams  opposed  the
decision to establish an official religion and praised the
Pilgrims’ separation of church and state. He advocated
toleration,  arguing  that  political  magistrates  had
authority  over  only  the  “bodies,  goods,  and  outward
estates of men,” not their spiritual lives. Williams also

questioned  the  Puritans’  seizure  of  Indian  lands.  The
magistrates banished him from the colony in 1636.

Williams and his followers settled 50 miles south
of Boston, founding the town of Providence on land
purchased from the Narragansett Indians. Other reli-
gious  dissidents  settled  nearby  at  Portsmouth  and
Newport. In 1644, these settlers obtained a corporate
charter  from  Parliament  for  a  new  colony — Rhode
Island — with  full  authority  to  rule  themselves.  In
Rhode  Island,  as  in  Plymouth,  there  was  no  legally
established  church,  and  individuals  could  worship
God as they pleased.

Anne  Hutchinson  The  Massachusetts  Bay  magis-
trates  saw  a  second  threat  to  their  authority  in  Anne
Hutchinson.  The  wife  of  a  merchant  and  mother  of
seven,  Hutchinson  held  weekly  prayer  meetings  for
women and accused various Boston clergymen of plac-
ing  undue  emphasis  on  good  behavior.  Like  Martin
Luther,  Hutchinson  denied  that  salvation  could  be
earned through good deeds. There was no “covenant
of  works”  that  would  save  the  well-behaved;  only  a
“covenant  of  grace” through which God saved those
he  predestined  for  salvation.  Hutchinson  likewise
declared  that  God  “revealed”  divine  truth  directly  to
individual  believers,  a  controversial  doctrine  that  the
Puritan magistrates denounced as heretical.

The magistrates also resented Hutchinson because
of  her  sex.  Like  other  Christians,  Puritans  believed
that both men and women could be saved. But gender
equality stopped there. Women were inferior to men
in  earthly  affairs,  said  leading  Puritan  divines,  who
told married women: “Thy desires shall bee subject to
thy  husband,  and  he  shall  rule  over  thee.”  Puritan
women  could  not  be  ministers  or  lay  preachers,  nor
could they vote in church affairs. In 1637, the magis-
trates  accused  Hutchinson  of  teaching  that  inward
grace freed an individual from the rules of the Church
and  found  her  guilty  of  holding  heretical  views.
Banished,  she  followed  Roger  Williams  into  exile  in
Rhode Island.

Other  Puritan  groups  moved  out  from  Massa-
chusetts  Bay  in  the  1630s  and  settled  on  or  near  the
Connecticut River. For several decades, the colonies of
Connecticut,  New  Haven,  and  Saybrook  were  inde-
pendent of one another; in 1660, they secured a charter
from  King  Charles  II  (r.  1660–1685)  for  the  self-
governing colony of Connecticut. Like Massachusetts
Bay, Connecticut had a legally established church and
an elected governor and assembly; however, it granted
voting rights to most property-owning men, not just to
church members as in the original Puritan colony.

