The Puritan Revolution in England  Meanwhile, a
religious civil war engulfed England. Archbishop Laud
had  imposed  the  Church  of  England  prayer  book  on
Presbyterian Scotland in 1637; five years later, a rebel
Scottish army invaded England. Thousands of English
Puritans (and hundreds of American Puritans) joined
the Scots, demanding religious reform and parliamen-
tary  power.  After  years  of  civil  war,  parliamentary
forces led by Oliver Cromwell emerged victorious. In
1649, Parliament beheaded King Charles I, proclaimed
a  republican  Commonwealth,  and  banished  bishops
and elaborate rituals from the Church of England.

The Protestant Almanack, 1700

The conﬂict between Protestants and Catholics took
many forms. To reinforce the religious identity of English
Protestants, a writer using the pseudonym Philopretes
published this almanac that charted not only the passage
of the seasons (and the inﬂuence of the pagan signs of the
“Zodiack”) but also the “Pernicious Revolutions of the Papacy
against the Lord and his Anointed.” Cambridge University Library.

CHAPTER 2

  American Experiments, 1521–1700

63

The  Puritan  triumph  in  England  was  short-lived.
Popular  support  for  the  Commonwealth  ebbed  after
Cromwell  took  dictatorial  control  in  1653.  Following
his  death  in  1658,  moderate  Protestants  and  a  resur-
gent aristocracy restored the monarchy and the hierar-
chy of bishops. With Charles II (r. 1660–1685) on the
throne,  England’s  experiment  in  radical  Protestant
government came to an end.

For the Puritans in America, the restoration of the
monarchy began a new phase of their “errand into the
wilderness.” They had come to New England expecting
to return to Europe in triumph. When the failure of the
English  Revolution  dashed  that  sacred  mission,  min-
isters exhorted congregations to create a godly repub-
lican  society  in  America.  The  Puritan  colonies  now
stood as outposts of Calvinism and the Atlantic repub-
lican tradition.

Puritanism and Witchcraft  Like Native Americans,
Puritans  believed  that  the  physical  world  was  full  of
supernatural  forces.  Devout  Christians  saw  signs  of
God’s (or Satan’s) power in blazing stars, birth defects,
and other unusual events. Noting after a storm that the
houses  of  many  ministers  “had  been  smitten  with
Lightning,” Cotton Mather, a prominent Puritan theo-
logian,  wondered  “what  the  meaning  of  God  should
be in it.”

Puritans  were  hostile  toward  people  who  they
believed  tried  to  manipulate  these  forces,  and  many
were willing to condemn neighbors as Satan’s “wizards”
or  “witches.”  People  in  the  town  of  Andover  “were
much addicted to sorcery,” claimed one observer, and
“there were forty men in it that could raise the Devil as
well  as  any  astrologer.”  Between  1647  and  1662,  civil
authorities in New England hanged fourteen people for
witchcraft,  most  of  them  older  women  accused  of
being “double-tongued” or of having “an unruly spirit.”
The  most  dramatic  episode  of  witch-hunting
occurred in Salem in 1692. Several girls who had expe-
rienced strange seizures accused neighbors of bewitch-
ing  them.  When  judges  at  the  accused  witches’  trials
allowed the use of “spectral” evidence — visions of evil
beings and marks seen only by the girls — the accusa-
tions  spun  out  of  control.  Eventually,  Massachusetts
Bay authorities tried 175 people for witchcraft and exe-
cuted 19 of them. The causes of this mass hysteria were
complex and are still debated. Some historians point to
group rivalries: many accusers were the daughters or
servants of poor farmers, whereas many of the alleged
witches  were  wealthier  church  members  or  their
friends. Because 18 of those put to death were women,
other  historians  see  the  episode  as  part  of  a  broader

