64

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

Puritan effort to subordinate women. Still others focus
on political instability in Massachusetts Bay in the early
1690s and on fears raised by recent Indian attacks in
nearby Maine, which had killed the parents of some of
the young accusers. It  is likely that all of these causes
played some role in the executions.

Whatever  the  cause,  the  Salem  episode  marked  a
major turning point. Shaken by the number of deaths,
government  officials  now  discouraged  legal  prosecu-
tions for witchcraft. Moreover, many influential people
embraced the outlook of the European Enlightenment,
a major intellectual movement that began around 1675
and promoted a rational, scientific view of the world.
Increasingly,  educated  men  and  women  explained
strange happenings and sudden deaths by reference to
“natural causes,” not witchcraft. Unlike Cotton Mather
(1663–1728), who believed that lightning was a super-
natural  sign,  Benjamin  Franklin  (1706–1790)  and
other  well-read  men  of  his  generation would  investi-
gate it as a natural phenomenon.

A  Yeoman  Society,  1630–1700
In  building  their
communities,  New  England  Puritans  consciously
rejected the feudal practices of English society. Many
Puritans came from middling families in East Anglia, a
region  of  pasture  lands  and  few  manors,  and  had  no
desire to live as tenants of wealthy aristocrats or submit
to oppressive taxation by a distant government. They

had  “escaped  out  of  the  pollutions  of  the  world,”  the
settlers  of  Watertown  in  Massachusetts  Bay  declared,
and  vowed  to  live  “close  togither”  in  self-governing
communities.  Accordingly,  the  General  Courts  of
Massachusetts Bay and Connecticut bestowed land on
groups of settlers, who then distributed it among the
male heads of families.

Widespread  ownership  of  land  did  not  mean
equality of wealth or status. “God had Ordained differ-
ent  degrees  and  orders  of  men,”  proclaimed  Boston
merchant  John  Saffin,  “some  to  be  Masters  and
Commanders,  others  to  be  Subjects,  and  to  be  com-
manded.”  Town  proprietors  normally  awarded  the
largest  plots  to  men  of  high  social  status  who  often
became selectmen and justices of the peace. However,
all  families  received  some  land,  and  most  adult  men
had a vote in the town meeting, the main institution of
local government (Map 2.7).

In this society of independent households and self-
governing  communities,  ordinary  farmers  had  much
more  political  power  than  Chesapeake  yeomen  and
European peasants did. Although Nathaniel Fish was
one of the poorest men in the town of Barnstable — he
owned  just  a  two-room  cottage,  8  acres  of  land,  an
ox, and a cow — he was a voting member of the town
meeting. Each year, Fish and other Barnstable farmers
levied  taxes;  enacted  ordinances  governing  fencing,
roadbuilding, and the use of common fields; and chose

The Mason Children

This 1670 portrait of David, Joanna, and
Abigail Mason by an unknown painter
illustrates the growing prosperity of
well-to-do Boston households. All three
wear white linen edged with ﬁne lace
and expensive ribbons. Eight-year-old
David is dressed like a gentleman; his
slashed sleeves, kid gloves, and silver-
tipped walking stick represent the height
of English fashion. Puritans, with their
plain style, were uneasy about such
ﬁnery. As minister Samuel Torrey com -
plained, “a spirit of worldliness, a spirit
of sensuality” was gaining strength in the
younger generation. The Fine Arts Museums
of San Francisco, M. H. de Young Memorial
Museum, Gift of Mr. and Mrs. John D.
Rockefeller III, 1979.7.3. © Fine Arts
Museums of San Francisco.

