Andover, 1650–1692
Nucleated to dispersed
in fifty years
New houses
By 1650
By 1692
Meeting House

0

2

4 miles

er
v
i
R

Merrimack

Meeting House

CHAPTER 2

  American Experiments, 1521–1700

65

The key to the right indicates that
a central purpose of this map is to
show the geographic distribution of
nucleated and dispersed villages. Why
are there so many nucleated towns
in the Connecticut River Valley and
so many dispersed settlements in
eastern Massachusetts?

ABENAKI

0

0

10

20 miles

10

20 kilometers

Village types
Nucleated
Initially nucleated,
dispersed by 1700
Dispersed

Indian settlements

Continuous English
settlements by 1700
Roads
Field boundaries

Hampton

Haverhill

The map of Andover shows how an originally nucleated
settlement changed over time into a dispersed town.
New farms tended to be located farther and farther
from the meeting house and town center, represented
by a triangle on the town plan.

(after Vaughn)

N
A
C
I
H
A
M

PENNACOOK

Ipswich

Andover

Manchester

TAINS

N
U
O

Greenfield

Deerfield

Hatfield

Northfield

Sunderland

KSHIRE M

BER

M A S S A C H U S E T T S

Hadley

NIPMUCK

Worcester

Oxford

Westfield

C
o
n
n
e
c
t
i
c
u
t
R
i
v
e
r

Windsor

Hartford

C O N N E C T I C U T

Farmington

Wethersfield

Woodstock

PEQUOT

RHODE
ISLAND

N
A
R
R
A
G
A
N
S
E
T
T

Salem

Newton

Sudbury

USET
MASSACH

Medfield

Dedham

Plymouth

WAMPANOAG

Barnstable

SAKONNET

Meeting House

ATLANTIC  OCEAN

W

N

S

E

Wethersfield in 1640 is an example
of a nucleated village, with house
lots clustered around the meeting
house and  fields arranged in
geometric patterns in the
surrounding countryside.

0

0.5

1 mile

Wethersfield,
1640

(after Andrews)

Housatonic  River

Newtown

Derby

Waterbury

MOHEGAN

Wallingford

Guilford

The field boundaries in Wethersfield indicate
that the land is flat in the Connecticut River
Valley. In contrast, the pattern of roads and
paths in Andover suggests a hilly topography.
These uplands gave the Merrimack River a
strong current and many rapids, which were
later harnessed for industrial development.
(See Map 9.1 on page 288.)

Long Island

(after Wood)

MAP 2.7
Settlement Patterns in New England Towns, 1630–1700

Throughout New England, colonists pressed onto desirable Indian lands. Initially, most Puritan
towns were compact: families lived close to one another in village centers and traveled daily to
work in the surrounding ﬁelds. This 1640 map of Wethersﬁeld, Connecticut, a town situated on the
broad plains of the Connecticut River Valley, shows this pattern clearly. The ﬁrst settlers in Andover,
Massachusetts, also chose to live in the village center. However, the rugged topography of eastern
Massachusetts encouraged the townspeople to disperse. By 1692 (as the varied location of new
houses shows), many Andover residents were living on farms distant from the village center.

