66

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

the selectmen who managed town affairs. The farmers
also selected the town’s representatives to the General
Court, which gradually displaced the governor as the
center of political authority. For Fish and thousands of
other ordinary settlers, New England had proved to be
a new world of opportunity.

Instability, War, and Rebellion
Everywhere  in  the  colonies,  conflicts  arose  over  the
control of resources, the legitimacy of colonial leaders’
claims to power, and attempts to define social and cul-
tural  norms.  Periodically,  these  conflicts  flared  spec-
tacularly into episodes of violence. Each episode has its
own story — its own unique logic and narrative — but
taken together, they also illustrate the way that, in their
formative stages, colonial societies pressured people to
accept  new  patterns  of  authority  and  new  claims  to
power. When these claims were contested, the results
could quickly turn deadly.

New England’s Indian Wars
Relations between colonists and Indians in early New
England  were  bewilderingly  complex.  Many  rival
Indian groups lived there before Europeans arrived; by
the  1630s,  these  groups  were  bordered  by  the  Dutch
colony  of  New  Netherland  to  their  west  and  the
various  English  settlements  to  the  east:  Plymouth,
Massachusetts  Bay,  Rhode  Island,  Connecticut,  New
Haven, and Saybrook. The region’s Indian leaders cre-
ated  various  alliances  for  the  purposes  of  trade  and
defense: Wampanoags with Plymouth; Mohegans with
Massachusetts  and  Connecticut;  Pequots  with  New
Netherland; Narragansetts with Rhode Island.

Puritan-Pequot  War  Because  of  their  alliance
with  the  Dutch,  the  Pequots  became  a  thorn  in  the
side of English traders. A series of violent encounters
began  in  July  1636  with  the  killing  of  English  trader
John  Oldham  and  escalated  until  May  1637,  when  a
combined  force  of  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut

The Hurons’ Feast of the Dead

Hurons buried their dead in temporary
raised tombs so they could easily care for
their spirits. When they moved their
villages in search of fertile soil and better
hunting, the Hurons held a Feast of the
Dead and reburied the bones of their own
deceased (and often bones from other
villages) in a common pit lined with beaver
robes. This solemn ceremony united living
as well as dead clan members, strengthen-
ing the bonds of the Huron Confederacy. It
also was believed to release the spirits of
the dead, allowing them to travel to the
land where the ﬁrst Huron, Aataentsic, fell
from the sky, “made earth and man,” and
lived with her son and assistant, Iouskeha.
Library of Congress.

