militiamen, accompanied by Narragansett and Mohe-
gan warriors, attacked a Pequot village and massacred
some five hundred men, women, and children. In the
months that followed, the New Englanders drove the
surviving Pequots into oblivion and divided their lands.
Believing they were God’s chosen people, Puritans
considered  their  presence  to  be  divinely  ordained.
Initially,  they  pondered  the  morality  of  acquiring
Native American lands. “By what right or warrant can
we  enter  into  the  land  of  the  Savages?”  they  asked
themselves.  Responding  to  such  concerns,  John
Winthrop  detected  God’s  hand  in  a  recent  smallpox
epidemic: “If God were not pleased with our inheriting
these parts,” he asked, “why doth he still make roome
for us by diminishing them as we increase?” Experiences
like the Pequot War confirmed New Englanders’ confi-
dence in their enterprise. “God laughed at the Enemies
of his People,” one soldier boasted after the 1637 mas-
sacre, “filling the Place with Dead Bodies.”

Like  Catholic  missionaries,  Puritans  believed  that
their church should embrace all peoples. However, their
strong emphasis on predestination — the idea that God
saved  only  a  few  chosen  people — made  it  hard  for
them to accept that Indians could be counted among
the elect. “Probably the devil” delivered these “miser-
able  savages”  to  America,  Cotton  Mather  suggested,
“in hopes that the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ would
never come here.” A few Puritan ministers committed
themselves to the effort to convert Indians. On Martha’s
Vineyard,  Jonathan  Mayhew  helped  to  create  an
Indian-led  community  of  Wampanoag  Christians.
John  Eliot  translated  the  Bible  into  Algonquian  and
created fourteen Indian praying towns. By 1670, more
than 1,000 Indians lived in these settlements, but rela-
tively  few  Native  Americans  were  ever  permitted  to
become full members of Puritan congregations.

Metacom’s  War,  1675–1676  By  the  1670s,  Euro-
peans in New England outnumbered Indians by three to
one. The English population had multiplied to 55,000,
while native peoples had diminished from an estimated
120,000  in  1570  to  barely  16,000.  To  the  Wampanoag
leader Metacom (also known as King Philip), the pros-
pects for coexistence looked dim. When his people cop-
ied  English  ways  by  raising  hogs  and  selling  pork  in
Boston, Puritan officials accused them of selling at “an
under  rate”  and  restricted  their  trade.  When  Indians
killed wandering hogs that devastated their cornfields,
authorities prosecuted them for violating English prop-
erty rights (American Voices, p. 68).

Metacom concluded that the English colonists had
to be expelled. In 1675, the Wampanoags’ leader forged

CHAPTER 2

  American Experiments, 1521–1700

67

Metacom (King Philip), Chief of the Wampanoags

The Indian War of 1675–1676 left an indelible mark on the
history of New England. This painting from the 1850s, done
on semitransparent cloth and lit from behind for effect, was
used by traveling performers to tell the story of King Philip’s
War. Notice that Metacom is pictured not as a savage but
as a digniﬁed man. No longer in danger of Indian attack,
nineteenth-century whites in New England adopted a
romanticized version of their region’s often brutal history.
© Shelburne Museum, Shelburne, Vermont.

a  military  alliance  with  the  Narragansetts  and  Nip-
mucks and attacked white settlements throughout New
England. Almost every day, settler
William Harris fearfully reported,
he  heard  new  reports  of  the
Indians’  “burneing  houses,  take-
ing cattell, killing men & women
&  Children:  &  carrying  others
captive.” Bitter fighting continued
into  1676,  ending  only  when  the
Indian warriors ran short of gun-
powder and the Massachusetts Bay government hired
Mohegan and Mohawk warriors, who killed Metacom.
Metacom’s War of 1675–1676 (which English set-
tlers  called  King  Philip’s  War)  was  a  deadly  affair.
Indians  destroyed  one-fifth  of  the  English  towns  in

UNDERSTAND POINTS
OF VIEW
How did New Englanders’
religious ideas inﬂuence
their relations with neigh-
boring Native American
peoples?

