A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

The Causes of

Metacom’s War

The causes of — and responsibility for — every American war are much debated,
and the war of 1675–1676 between Puritans and Native Americans is no excep-
tion. The English settlers called it King Philip’s War, suggesting that the Wampa-
noag chief Metacom (King Philip) instigated it. Was that the case? We have no
ﬁrsthand Indian accounts of its origins, but three English accounts offer differ-
ent versions of events. Given the variation among the accounts and their frag-
mentary character, how can historians reconstruct what “really happened”?

John Easton
A Relacion of the Indyan Warre

John Easton was the deputy governor of Rhode Island and
a  Quaker.  Like  many  Quakers,  Easton  was  a  paciﬁst  and
tried to prevent the war. He wrote this “Relacion” shortly
after the conﬂict ended.

In [January 1675], an Indian was found dead; and by
a coroner inquest of Plymouth Colony judged mur-
dered. . . . The dead Indian was called Sassamon, and
a Christian that could read and write. . . .

The report came that . . . three Indians had confessed
and accused Philip [of employing them to kill Sassamon,
and that consequently] . . . the English would hang Philip.
So the Indians were afraid, and reported that . . . Philip
[believed that the English] . . . might kill him to have his
land. . . . So Philip kept his men in arms.

Plymouth governor [Josiah Winslow] required him to

disband his men, and informed him his jealousy [his
worry about land seizure] was false. Philip answered he
would do no harm, and thanked the Governor for his
information. The three Indians were hung [on June 8,
1675]. . . . And it was reported [that] Sassamon, before his
death had informed [the English] of the Indian plot, and
that if the Indians knew it they would kill him, and that
the heathen might destroy the English for their wicked-
ness as God had permitted the heathen to destroy the
Israelites of old.

So the English were afraid and Philip was afraid and
both increased in arms; but for forty years’ time reports
and jealousies of war had been very frequent that we did
not think that now a war was breaking forth. But about a
week before it did we had cause to think it would; then to
endeavor to prevent it, we sent a man to Philip. . . .
He called his council and agreed to come to us;
[Philip] came himself, unarmed, and about forty of his
men, armed. Then five of us went over [to speak to the
Indians]. Three were magistrates. We sat very friendly
together [June 14–18]. We told him our business was to

endeavor that they might not . . . do wrong. They said that
was well; they had done no wrong; the English wronged
them. We said we knew the English said that the Indians
wronged them, and the Indians said the English wronged
them, but our desire was the quarrel might rightly be
decided in the best way, and not as dogs decide their
quarrels.

The Indians owned that fighting was the worst way;
then they propounded how right might take place; we
said by arbitration. They said all English agreed against
them; and so by arbitration they had had much wrong,
many square miles of land so taken from them, for the
English would have English arbitrators. . . .

Another grievance [of the Indians]: the English cattle

and horses still increased [and that] . . . they could not
keep their corn from being spoiled [by the English
livestock]. . . .

So we departed without any discourtesies; and sud-

denly [c. June 25] had [a] letter from [the] Plymouth
 governor, [that] they intended in arms to [subjugate]
Philip . . . and in a week’s time after we had been with
the Indians the war thus begun.

Source: John Easton, “A Relacion of the Indyan Warre, by Mr. Easton, of Roade Isld.,
1675,” in Narratives of the Indian Wars, 1675–1699, ed. Charles H. Lincoln (New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1913), 7–17.

Edward Randolph
Short Narrative of My Proceedings

Edward  Randolph,  an  English  customs  ofﬁcial  in  Boston,
denounced the independent policies of the Puritan colo-
nies and tried to subject them to English control. His “Short
Narrative,” written in 1675, was a report to his superiors in
London.

Various are the reports and conjectures of the causes of
the present Indian war. Some impute it to an impudent
zeal in the magistrates of Boston to Christianize those
heathen before they were civilized and enjoining them the

68

