strict observation of their laws, which, to a people so rude
and licentious, hath proved even intolerable. . . . While
the magistrates, for their profit, put the laws severely
in execution against the Indians, the people, on the
other side, for lucre and gain, entice and provoke the
Indians . . . to drunkenness, to which those people are
so generally addicted that they will strip themselves to
their skin to have their fill of rum and brandy. . . .

Some believe there have been vagrant and jesuitical

[French] priests, who have made it their business, for
some years past, to go from Sachem to Sachem [chief to
chief], to exasperate the Indians against the English and
to bring them into a confederacy, and that they were
promised supplies from France and other parts to
 extirpate the English nation out of the continent of
America. . . . Others impute the cause to some injuries
offered to the Sachem Philip; for he being possessed of a
tract of land called Mount Hope . . . some English had a
mind to dispossess him thereof, who never wanting one
pretence or other to attain their end, complained of inju-
ries done by Philip and his Indians to their stock and
cattle, whereupon Philip was often summoned before the
magistrate, sometimes imprisoned, and never released
but upon parting with a considerable part of his land.
But the government of the Massachusetts . . . do
declare [that because of the sins of the people] . . . God
hath given the heathen commission to rise against
them. . . . For men wearing long hair and periwigs made
of women’s hair; for women . . . cutting, curling and
 laying out the hair. . . . For profaneness in the people
not frequenting their [church] meetings.

Source: Albert B. Hart, ed., American History Told by Contemporaries (New York:
Macmillan, 1897), 1: 458–460.

Benjamin Church
Entertaining Passages

Captain  Benjamin  Church  fought  in  the  war  and  helped
end it by capturing Metacom’s wife and son and leading
the expedition that killed the Indian chieftain. Forty years
later,  in  1716,  Church’s  son  Thomas  wrote  an  account  of
the war based on his father’s notes and recollections.

While Mr. Church was diligently settling his new
farm . . . Behold! The rumor of a war between the English
and the natives gave a check to his projects. . . . Philip,
according to his promise to his people, permitted them to
march out of the neck [of the Mount Hope peninsula,

where they lived]. . . . They plundered the nearest houses
that the inhabitants had deserted [on the rumor of a war],
but as yet offered no violence to the people, at least none
were killed. . . . However, the alarm was given by their
numbers, and hostile equipage, and by the prey they
made of what they could find in the forsaken houses.
An express came the same day to the governor

[c. June 25], who immediately gave orders to the captains
of the towns to march the greatest part of their compa-
nies [of militia], and to rendezvous at Taunton. . . .

The enemy, who began their hostilities with plunder-
ing and destroying cattle, did not long content themselves
with that game. They thirsted for English blood, and they
soon broached it; killing two men in the way not far from
Mr. Miles’s garrison. And soon after, eight more at Mat-
tapoisett, upon whose bodies they exercised more than
brutish barbarities. . . .

These provocations drew out the resentment of some

of Capt. Prentice’s troop, who desired they might have
liberty to go out and seek the enemy in their own quarters
[c. June 26].

Source: Benjamin Church, Entertaining Passages Relating to Philip’s War Which Began in
the Month of June, 1675, ed. Thomas Church (Boston: B. Green, 1716).

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Compare what these documents say about the causes of
the war. Where do the documents agree and disagree
about these causes?

2.  According to Randolph, what did the magistrates of
Massachusetts Bay believe to be a major cause of the
war? Could historians verify or disprove their explana-
tion? How? What additional sources of evidence might
be useful?

3.  Drawing from these sources, who was the prime instiga-
tor of the war? Which documents provide the most
compelling evidence for your conclusion? Why?

69

