70

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

Massachusetts and Rhode Island and killed 1,000 set-
tlers,  nearly  5  percent  of  the  adult  population;  for  a
time the Puritan experiment hung in the balance. But
the natives’ losses — from famine and disease, death in
battle, and sale into slavery — were much larger: about
4,500  Indians  died,  one-quarter  of  an  already  dimin-
ished population. Many of the surviving Wampanoag,
Narragansett, and Nipmuck peoples moved west, inter-
marrying with Algonquian tribes allied to the French.
Over the next century, these displaced Indian peoples
would take their revenge, joining with French Catholics
to attack their Puritan enemies. Metacom’s War did not
eliminate the presence of Native Americans in south-
ern  New  England,  but  it  effectively  destroyed  their
existence as independent peoples.

Bacon’s Rebellion
At the same time that New England fought its war with
Metacom,  Virginia  was  wracked  by  a  rebellion  that
nearly  toppled  its  government.  It,  too,  grew  out  of  a
conflict with neighboring Indians, but this one inspired
a popular uprising against the colony’s royal governor.
Like Metacom’s War, it highlighted the way that a land-
intensive  settler  colony  created  friction  with  Native
American populations; in addition, it dramatized the
way that ordinary colonists could challenge the right of
a new planter elite to rule over them.

By  the  1670s,  economic  and  political  power  in
Virginia was in the hands of a small circle of men who
amassed  land,  slaves,  and  political  offices.  Through
headrights and royal grants, they controlled nearly half
of all the settled land in Virginia; what they could not
plant themselves, they leased to tenants. Freed inden-
tured servants found it ever harder to get land of their
own; many were forced to lease lands, or even sign new
indentures, to make ends meet. To make matters worse,
the price of tobacco fell until planters received only a
penny a pound for their crops in the 1670s.

At the top of Virginia’s narrow social pyramid was
William  Berkeley,  governor  between  1642  and  1652
and  again  after  1660.  To  consolidate  power,  Berkeley
bestowed large land grants on members of his council.
The  councilors  exempted  these  lands  from  taxation
and  appointed  friends  as  justices  of  the  peace  and
county  judges.  To  win  support  in  the  House  of
Burgesses,  Berkeley  bought  off  legislators  with  land
grants  and  lucrative  appointments  as  sheriffs  and  tax
collectors. But social unrest erupted when the Burgesses
took the vote away from landless freemen, who by now
constituted half the adult white men. Although property-

holding yeomen retained their voting rights, they were
angered by falling tobacco prices, political corruption,
and “grievous taxations” that threatened the “utter ruin
of  us  the  poor  commonalty.”  Berkeley  and  his  allies
were living on borrowed time.

Frontier War  An Indian conflict ignited the flame of
social  rebellion.  In  1607,  when  the  English  intruded,
30,000 Native Americans resided in Virginia; by 1675,
the native population had dwindled to only 3,500. By
then, Europeans numbered some 38,000 and Africans
another 2,500. Most Indians lived on treaty-guaranteed
territory  along  the  frontier,  where  poor  freeholders
and  landless  former  servants  now  wanted  to  settle,
demanding  that  the  natives  be  expelled  or  extermi-
nated. Their demands were ignored by wealthy plant-
ers, who wanted a ready supply of tenants and laborers,
and by Governor Berkeley and the planter-merchants,
who traded with the Occaneechee Indians for beaver
pelts and deerskins.

Fighting  broke  out  late  in  1675,  when  a  vigilante
band of Virginia militiamen murdered thirty Indians.
Defying  Berkeley’s  orders,  a  larger  force  then  sur-
rounded a fortified Susquehannock village and killed
five leaders who came out to negotiate. The Susquehan-
nocks retaliated by attacking outlying plantations and
killing  three  hundred  whites.  In  response,  Berkeley
proposed a defensive strategy: a series of frontier forts
to deter Indian intrusions. The settlers dismissed this
scheme as a militarily useless plot by planter-merchants
to  impose  high  taxes  and  take  “all  our  tobacco  into
their own hands.”

Challenging  the  Government  Enter  Nathaniel
Bacon, a young, well-connected migrant from England
who emerged as the leader of the rebels. Bacon held a
position on the governor’s council, but he was shut out
of Berkeley’s inner circle and differed with Berkeley on
Indian policy. When the governor refused to grant him
a military commission, Bacon mobilized his neighbors
and attacked any Indians he could find. Condemning
the  frontiersmen  as  “rebels  and  mutineers,”  Berkeley
expelled Bacon from the council and had him arrested.
But Bacon’s army forced the governor to release their
leader and hold legislative elections. The newly elected
House of Burgesses enacted far-reaching reforms that
curbed  the  powers  of  the  governor  and  council  and
restored voting rights to landless freemen.

These  much-needed  reforms  came  too  late.  Poor
farmers and servants resented years of exploitation by
wealthy  planters,  arrogant  justices  of  the  peace,  and

