CHAPTER 2

  American Experiments, 1521–1700

71

power and sway is got into the hands of the rich,” Bacon
proclaimed  as  his  army  burned  Jamestown  to  the
ground  and  plundered  the  plantations  of  Berkeley’s
allies.  When  Bacon  died  suddenly  of  dysentery  in
October  1676,  the  governor  took  revenge,  dispersing
the rebel army, seizing the estates of well-to-do rebels,
and hanging 23 men.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
In what ways was Bacon’s
Rebellion symptomatic
of social tensions in the
colony of Virginia?

free  after

In the wake of Bacon’s Rebellion, Virginia’s leaders
worked  harder  to  appease  their  humble  neighbors.
But  the  rebellion  also  coincided  with  the  time  when
Virginia  planters  were  switch-
ing  from  indentured  servants,
who  became
four
years,  to  slaves,  who  labored  for
life.  In  the  eighteenth  century,
wealthy  planters  would  make
common  cause  with  poorer
whites,  while  slaves  became  the
colony’s  most  exploited  workers.  That  fateful  change
eased tensions within the free population but commit-
ted  subsequent  generations  of  Americans  to  a  labor
system based on racial exploitation. Bacon’s Rebellion,
like  Metacom’s  War,  reminds  us  that  these  colonies
were  unfinished  worlds,  still  searching  for  viable
foundations.

Nathaniel Bacon

Condemned as a rebel and a traitor in his own time,
Nathaniel Bacon emerged in the late nineteenth century as
a southern hero, a harbinger of the Confederate rebels of
1860–1865. The Association for the Preservation of Virginia
Antiquities, founded in 1888, commissioned this stained-glass
window depicting Bacon in dual guises of a well-dressed
gentleman and a rebel in body armor. Installing Bacon’s por -
trait in a window of the Powder Magazine in Williamsburg
(built by Governor Alexander Spotswood in 1715), explained
a leading member of the association, would connect “present
Virginia with her great and noble past” and commemorate
those who shed their “blood for Virginia and the South.”
Preservation Virginia.

“wicked  &  pernicious  Counsellors.”  As  one  yeoman
rebel complained, “A poor man who has only his labour
to  maintain  himself  and  his  family  pays  as  much  [in
taxes] as a man who has 20,000 acres.” Backed by 400
armed men, Bacon issued a “Manifesto and Declaration
of the People” that demanded the removal of Indians
and an end to the rule of wealthy “parasites.” “All the

SUMMARY
During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, three
types  of  colonies  took  shape  in  the  Americas.  In
Mesoamerica and the Andes, Spanish colonists made
indigenous  empires  their  own,  capitalizing  on  pre-
existing  labor  systems  and  using  tribute  and  the  dis-
covery of precious metals to generate enormous wealth,
which  Philip  II  used  to  defend  the  interests  of  the
Catholic  Church  in  Europe.  In  tropical  and  sub-
tropical regions, colonizers transferred the plantation
complex — a  centuries-old  form  of  production  and
labor  discipline — to  places  suited  to  growing  exotic
crops  like  sugar,  tobacco,  and  indigo.  The  rigors  of
plantation  agriculture  demanded  a  large  supply  of
labor,  which  was  first  filled  in  English  colonies  by
indentured  servitude  and  later  supplemented  and
eclipsed  by  African  slavery.  The  third  type  of  colony,
neo-European settlement, developed in North Amer-
ica’s temperate zone, where European migrants adapted
familiar systems of social and economic organization
in new settings.

Everywhere in the Americas, colonization was, first
and foremost, a process of experimentation. As resources

