72

PART 1

  TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

from the Americas flowed to Europe, monarchies were
strengthened  and  the  competition  among  them —
sharpened  by  the  schism  between  Protestants  and
Catholics — gained  new  force  and  energy.  Establish-
ing  colonies  demanded  political,  social,  and  cultural
innovations that threw Europeans, Native Americans,
and  Africans  together  in  bewildering  circumstances,
triggered  massive  ecological  change  through  the

Columb ian  Exchange,  and  demanded  radical  adjust-
ments. In the Chesapeake and New England — the two
earliest  regions  of  English  settlement  on  mainland
North  America — the  adjustment  to  new  circum-
stances sparked conflict with neighboring Indians and
waves of instability within the colonies. These external
and  internal  crises  were  products  of  the  struggle  to
adapt to the rigors of colonization.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

chattel slavery (p. 40)
neo-Europes (p. 40)
encomienda (p. 42)
Columbian Exchange (p. 43)
outwork (p. 45)
mercantilism (p. 45)
House of Burgesses (p. 52)
royal colony (p. 52)
freeholds (p. 53)
headright system (p. 54)

indentured servitude (p. 54)
Pilgrims (p. 60)
Puritans (p. 61)
joint-stock corporation (p. 62)
predestination (p. 62)
toleration (p. 62)
covenant of works (p. 62)
covenant of grace (p. 62)
town meeting (p. 64)

Key People

Philip II (p. 44)
Francis Drake (p. 45)
Opechancanough (p. 52)
Lord Baltimore (p. 52)
John Winthrop (p. 61)
Roger Williams (p. 62)
Anne Hutchinson (p. 62)
Metacom (p. 67)

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  How did Spain’s conquest of central Mexico and the
the
Andes  shape  European  competition
Americas?  How  did  the  Protestant  Reformation
affect this competition?

in

2.  How  did  environmental  and  ecological  factors
shape colonial enterprise, and how did the process
of  colonization  impact  American  ecology  and
environments?

