CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 2

  CHAPTER REVIEW
  CHAPTER REVIEW

73
73

3.  What “push factors” caused people to leave England
for  its  colonies  in  the  seventeenth  century?  What
“pull factors” drew them to particular colonies or
regions?

Beliefs,  and  Culture”  on  the  thematic  timeline
on  page  5.  How  did  political  developments  in
seventeenth-century England impact the develop-
ment of its American colonies?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events listed under “Politics and Power” and “Ideas,

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS TIME AND PLACE

In Chapter 1, we
saw that there were many parallels between Native
American, European, and African societies on the
eve of contact. Yet Europeans ended up dominating
both Native American and African populations in
colonial  American  settings.  Based  on  what  you
learned in Chapter 2, what factors help to explain
that dominance?

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  Take  another  look  at  the
image of John Smith and Opechancanough on page
49.  It  is  taken  from  Smith’s  Generall  Historie  of
Virginia,  New-England,  and  the  Summer  Isles,
which  was  first  published  in  1624.  What  is  the
dominant theme of the image? How might recent
events in Virginia have colored the emphases in the
book’s illustrations?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Virginia DeJohn Anderson, Creatures of Empire
(2004). Explores the significance of animal domestica-
tion in early New England and Chesapeake colonies.

“The Plymouth Colony Archive Project” (histarch
.uiuc.edu/plymouth/). A rich array of fully searchable
texts and material culture resources.

Kathleen Brown, Good Wives, Nasty Wenches, and
Anxious Patriarchs (1996). Examines the interrela-
tionship of gender and race in early Virginia.

Alfred W. Crosby, Ecological Imperialism (1986).
Introduces the term neo-Europes and asks why there
are so many of them.

Jenny Hale Pulsipher, Subjects unto the Same King
(2005). Considers the multifaceted contest for power
in seventeenth-century New England.

“Salem Witch Trials” (etext.virginia.edu/salem
/witchcraft/home.html). Extensive materials on the
Salem witchcraft trials, including a fascinating
interactive map feature.

