2P A R T

C H A P T E R 3
The British Atlantic
World, 1660–1750

C H A P T E R 4
Growth, Diversity, and
Conflict, 1720–1763

76

British North
America and the
Atlantic World
1660–1763

By 1660, the patterns of colonial enterprise in the Americas were becom-

ing clear. For the colonies of England — which became Britain after the

1707 Act of Union with Scotland — the period from 1660 to 1763 was one

of  growth  and  diversification.  Slave  imports  to  plantation  colonies

exploded, while a wide array of European peoples — coming from Ireland

and continental Europe as well as England, Wales, and Scotland — jostled

together  in  rapidly  growing  regions  of  neo-European  settlement.  Yet  a

coherent  imperial  vision  for  these  American  holdings  emerged  slowly,

and the colonies remained largely independent of crown control.

After  1689,  Europe  plunged  into  a  century  of  warfare  that  had  an

enormous  impact  on  the  Americas.  As  wars  spilled  over  into  North

America, British, French, and Spanish colonies all engaged more deeply

with neighboring Indians, whom they often sought to employ as allies in

their  struggles  to  control  North  American  territory.  Native  American

polities were undergoing dramatic transformations in these same years,

reshaping  themselves  to  function  more  effectively  in  relation  to  their

European neighbors. At the same time, warfare, immigration, and trade

laid  the  foundation  for  more  intensive  interactions  across  the  Atlantic.

These interactions, and the cultural movements they supported, helped to

knit together the increasingly diverse colonies of British North America.

Part  2  addresses  these  developments,  giving  particular  attention  to

the following three main concepts:

