The Diversification of
British North America

The American colonies of the various European nations
gradually diverged from each other in character. The
tribute-based societies at the core of Spain’s empire
developed into complex multiracial societies; Portu-
guese Brazil was dominated by its plantation and
mining enterprises; the Dutch largely withdrew their
energies from the Americas, except for a few planta-
tion colonies; the French, too, developed several
important plantation colonies in the West Indies but
struggled to populate their vast North American
holdings. The population of Britain’s colonies, by
contrast, grew and diversiﬁed after 1660. Britain came
to dominate the Atlantic slave trade and brought more
than two million slaves to its American colonies. The
great majority went to Jamaica, Barbados, and the
other sugar islands, but half a million found their way
to the mainland, where, by 1763, they constituted
nearly 20 percent of the mainland colonies’ popula-
tions. Slavery was a growing and thriving institution in
British North America.

Non-English Europeans also crossed the Atlantic in
very large numbers. The ethnic landscape of Britain’s
mainland colonies was dramatically altered by 115,000
migrants from Ireland (most of them Scots-Irish Presby-
terians) and 100,000 Germans. Most immigrated to
Pennsylvania, which soon had the most ethnically
diverse population of Europeans on the continent.
Relations among these groups were often divisive, as
each struggled to maintain its identity and autonomy in
a rapidly changing landscape.

Rise of the British Atlantic World

These population movements were part of the larger
growth and development of the Atlantic World, a
phrase historians use to refer to the quickening pace
of contacts and exchanges connecting Europe, Africa,
and the Americas. The rise of the British Atlantic was a
layered phenomenon that began with the strength of
Britain’s transatlantic shipping networks, which in turn
laid the foundation for large-scale population ﬂows,
 rising economic productivity, and dramatic cultural
transformations. The growing power of its navy,
merchant marine, and manufacturing sector allowed
Britain to dominate the eighteenth-century Atlantic.
Much of the cultural impact of its maritime power
derived from two further developments: the print
revolution, which brought a vast array of ideas into
circulation; and the consumer revolution, which
ﬂooded the Atlantic World with a wide array of newly
available merchandise.

The British Atlantic World gave rise to four critically

important cultural developments. It spread Enlight-
enment ideas and helped to create a transatlantic
community of literati interested in science and rational-
ism; it supported communities of Pietists who promoted
the revival and expansion of Christianity; it gave well-
to-do colonists access to genteel values and the ﬁnery
needed to put them into action; and, by making such
an abundance of consumer goods available, it encour-
aged colonists to go further into debt than they ever
had before.

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

77

