British North
America and the
Atlantic World
1660–1763

Contact and Conflict

Thematic Understanding

This timeline organizes some of the important

developments of this period into themes.

How did the demographic changes outlined

under the theme “Peopling” impact the

developments that are listed under “Work,

Exchange, and Technology”?  >

Alongside the diversiﬁcation of colonial populations
and the rise of the British Atlantic, the eighteenth
century was shaped by contact and conﬂict: between
colonies and their Native American neighbors, and also
among rival European empires. In Europe, the period
after 1689 has sometimes been called the Second
Hundred Years’ War, when Britain, France, and their
European allies went to war against each other repeat-
edly. As these conﬂicts came to the North American
theater, they decisively inﬂuenced Indian relations.
Native American populations shrank dramatically or
disappeared altogether during the seventeenth century,
devastated by the effects of the Columbian Exchange
(Chapter 2). The rise of imperial warfare encouraged
the process of “tribalization,” whereby Indians
regrouped into political structures — called “tribes” by
Europeans — that could deal more effectively with their
colonial neighbors and strike alliances in times of war.
Europeans, in turn, employed Indian allies as proxy
warriors in their conﬂicts over North American territory.
This pattern culminated in the Great War for Empire,

which began in the North American backcountry,
engaged thousands of provincial soldiers and Native
American warriors, and reshaped the map of North
America. The Treaty of Paris of 1763 gave Britain
control of the entire continent east of the Mississippi.
Events would soon show what a mixed blessing that
outcome would turn out to be.

78

