The British Atlantic World
1660–1750

For  two  weeks  in  June  1744,  the

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
How did the South Atlantic System
create  an  interconnected  Atlantic
World,  and  how  did  this  system
impact  development  in  the  British
colonies?

town  of  Lancaster,  Pennsylvania,
hosted more than 250 Iroquois men,
women, and children for a diplomatic con-
ference with representatives from Pennsyl-
vania,  Maryland,  and  Virginia.  Crowds  of
curious  observers  thronged  Lancaster’s
streets and courthouse. The conference grew out of a diplomatic system between the
colonies and the Iroquois designed to air grievances and resolve conﬂict: the Covenant
Chain. Participants welcomed each other, exchanged speeches, and negotiated agree-
ments in public ceremonies whose minutes became part of the ofﬁcial record of the
colonies.

At Lancaster, the colonies had much to ask of their Iroquois allies. For one thing,
they wanted them to conﬁrm a land agreement. The Iroquois often began such confer-
ences by resisting land deals; as the Cayuga orator Gachradodon said, “You know very
well, when the White people came ﬁrst here they were poor; but now they have got our
Lands, and are by them become rich, and we are now poor; what little we have had for
the Land goes soon away, but the Land lasts forever.” In the end, however, they had
little  choice  but  to  accept  merchandise  in  exchange  for  land,  since  colonial  ofﬁcials
were unwilling to take no for an answer. The colonists also announced that Britain was
once again going to war with France, and they requested military support from their
Iroquois allies. Canassatego — a tall, commanding Onondaga orator, about sixty years
old,  renowned  for  his  eloquence — replied,  “We  shall  never  forget  that  you  and  we
have but one Heart, one Head, one Eye, one Ear, and one Hand. We shall have all your
Country under our Eye, and
take  all  the  Care  we  can  to
prevent  any  Enemy  from
coming into it.”

To see a longer excerpt of the Canassatego
document, along with other primary sources from
this period, see Sources for America’s History.

The  Lancaster  conference — and  dozens  of  others  like  it  that  occurred  between
1660 and 1750 — demonstrates that the British colonies, like those of France and Spain,
relied ever more heavily on alliances with Native Americans as they sought to extend
their power in North America. Indian nations remade themselves in these same years,
creating  political  structures — called  “tribes”  by  Europeans — that  allowed  them  to
regroup in the face of population decline and function more effectively alongside neigh-
boring colonies. The colonies, meanwhile, were drawn together into an integrated eco-
nomic  sphere — the  South  Atlantic  System — that  brought  prosperity  to  British  North
America, while they achieved a measure of political autonomy that became essential to
their understanding of what it meant to be British  subjects.

3

C H A P T E R

COLONIES TO EMPIRE,
1660–1713

The Restoration Colonies and

Imperial Expansion

From Mercantilism to Imperial

Dominion

The Glorious Revolution in
 England and America

IMPERIAL WARS AND
NATIVE PEOPLES

Tribalization

Indian Goals

THE IMPERIAL SLAVE
ECONOMY

The South Atlantic System

Africa, Africans, and the Slave

Trade

Slavery in the Chesapeake and

South Carolina

An African American Community

Emerges

The Rise of the Southern Gentry

THE NORTHERN
MARITIME ECONOMY

The Urban Economy

Urban Society

THE NEW POLITICS OF
EMPIRE, 1713–1750

The Rise of Colonial Assemblies

Salutary Neglect

Protecting the Mercantile System

Mercantilism and the American

Colonies

80

