82

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

Colonies to Empire, 1660–1713
Before 1660, England governed its New England and
Chesapeake colonies haphazardly. Taking advantage of
that laxness and the English civil war, local “big men”
(Puritan  magistrates  and  tobacco  planters)  ran  their
societies  as  they  wished.  Following  the  restoration of
the  monarchy  in  1660,  royal  bureaucrats  tried  to
impose order on the unruly settlements and, enlisting
the  aid  of  Indian  allies,  warred  with  rival  European
powers.

The Restoration Colonies and
Imperial Expansion
Charles II (r. 1660–1685) expanded English power in
Asia and America. In 1662, he married the Portuguese
princess Catherine of Braganza, whose dowry included
the islands of Bombay (present-day Mumbai). Then, in
1663,  Charles  initiated  new  outposts  in  America  by
authorizing eight loyal noblemen to settle Carolina, an
area  that  had  long  been  claimed  by  Spain  and  popu-
lated by thousands of Indians. The  following year, he
awarded  the  just-conquered  Dutch  colony  of  New
Netherland  to  his  brother  James,  the  Duke  of  York,
who  renamed  the  colony  New  York  and  then  re-
granted a  portion of it, called New Jersey, to another
group of proprietors. Finally, in 1681, Charles granted
a vast track to William Penn: Pennsylvania, or “Penn’s
Woods.” In a great land grab, England had ousted the
Dutch  from  North  America,  intruded  into  Spain’s
northern empire, and claimed all the land in between.

The Carolinas
In 1660, English settlement was con-
centrated  in  New  England  and  the  Chesapeake.  Five
corporate  colonies  coexisted  in  New  England:  Mass-
achusetts  Bay,  Plymouth,  Connecticut,  New  Haven,
and Rhode Island. (Connecticut absorbed New Haven
in 1662, while Massachusetts Bay became a royal col-
ony  and  absorbed  Plymouth  in  1692.)  In  the  Chesa-
peake,  Virginia  was  controlled  by  the  crown  while
Maryland was in the hands of a Lord Proprietor. Like
Lord  Baltimore’s  Maryland,  the  new  settlements  in
Carolina, New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania —
the  Restoration  Colonies,  as  historians  call  them —
were proprietorships: the Carolina and Jersey grantees,
the Duke of York, and William Penn owned all the land
in  their  new  colonies  and  could  rule  them  as  they
wished, provided that their laws conformed broadly to
those  of  England  (Table  3.1).  Indeed,  in  New  York,
James  II  refused  to  allow  an  elective  assembly  and
ruled by decree. The Carolina proprietors envisioned a

traditional  European  society;  there  the  Fundamental
Constitutions of Carolina (1669) legally established the
Church of England and prescribed a manorial system,
with a mass of serfs governed by a handful of powerful
nobles.

The  manorial  system  proved  a  fantasy.  The  first
North Carolina settlers were a mixture of poor families
and  runaway  servants  from  Virginia  and  English
Quakers,  an  equality-minded  Protestant  sect  (also
known as the Society of Friends). Quakers “think there
is no difference between a Gentleman and a labourer,”
complained an Anglican clergyman. Refusing to work
on  large  manors,  the  settlers  raised  corn,  hogs,  and
tobacco on  modest  family  farms.  Inspired  by  Bacon’s
Rebellion,  they  rebelled  in  1677  against  taxes  on
tobacco and again in 1708 against taxes to support the
Anglican  Church.  Through  their  stubborn  indepen-
dence,  residents  forced  the  proprietors  to  abandon
their dreams of a feudal society.

In  South  Carolina,  the  colonists  also  went  their
own way. The leading white settlers there were migrants
from overcrowded Barbados. Hoping to re- create that
island’s  hierarchical  slave  society,  they  used  enslaved
workers — both  Africans  and  Native  Americans — to
raise cattle and food crops for export to the West Indies.
Carolina merchants opened a lucrative trade in deer-
skins and Indian slaves with neighboring peoples. Then,
around  1700,  South  Carolina  planters  hit  upon  rice
cultivation.  The  swampy  estuaries  of  the  coastal  low
country could be modified with sluices, floodgates, and
check dams to create ideal rice-growing conditions, and
slaves could do the backbreaking work. By 1708, white
Carolinians relied upon a few thousand slaves to work
their coastal plantations; thereafter, the African popu-
lation  exploded.  Blacks  outnumbered  whites  by  1710
and constituted two-thirds of the population by 1740.

William Penn and Pennsylvania
In contrast to the
Carolinas, which languished for decades with propri-
etors and colonists at odds, William Penn’s colony was
marked  by  unity  of  purpose:  all  who  came  hoped  to
create  a  prosperous  neo-European  settlement  that
approximated  the  social  and  economic  systems  they
knew  at  home.  In  1681,  Charles  II  bestowed  Penn-
sylvania  (which  included  present-day  Delaware)  on
William  Penn  as  payment  for  a  large  debt  owed  to
Penn’s  father.  The  younger  Penn,  though  born  to
wealth — he  owned  substantial  estates  in  Ireland  and
England and lived lavishly — joined the Quakers, who
condemned extravagance. Penn designed Pennsylvania
as a refuge for his fellow Quakers, who were persecuted
in England because they refused to serve in the military
or pay taxes to support the Church of England. Penn

