CHAPTER 3

  The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750

83

TABLE 3.1

English Colonies Established in North America, 1660–1750

Colony

Carolina

North

South

New Jersey

New York

Pennsylvania

Georgia

New Hampshire
(separated from
Massachusetts)

Original
Colony Type

Religion

Status in 1775

Proprietary

Church of England

Royal

Chief Export/
Economic
Activity

Farming, naval
stores

Rice, indigo

Proprietary

Church of England

Royal

Proprietary

Church of England

Royal

Proprietary

Quaker

Proprietary

Trustees

Church of England

Royal

Wheat

Wheat

Wheat

Rice

Date

1663

1691

1691

1664

1664

1681

1732

1741

Royal

Congregationalist

Royal

Nova Scotia

1749

Royal

Church of England

Royal

Mixed farming,
lumber, naval
stores

Fishing, mixed
farming, naval
stores

himself  had  spent  more  than  two  years  in  jail  in
England for preaching his beliefs.

Like  the  Puritans,  the  Quakers  sought  to  restore
Christianity  to  its  early  simple  spirituality.  But  they
rejected  the  Puritans’  pessimistic  Calvinist  doctrines,
which restricted salvation to a small elect. The Quakers
followed  the  teachings  of  two  English  visionaries,
George Fox and Margaret Fell, who argued that God
had  imbued  all  men — and  women — with  an  “inner
light”  of  grace  or  understanding.  Reflecting  the  sect’s
emphasis  on  gender  equality,  350  Quaker  women
would serve as ministers in the colonies.

Mindful of the catastrophic history of Indian rela-
tions  in  the  Chesapeake  and  New  England,  Penn
exhorted  colonists  to  “sit  downe  Lovingly”  alongside
the Native American inhabitants of the Delaware and
Susquehanna valleys. He wrote a letter to the leaders of
the  Iroquois  Confederacy  alerting  them  to  his  inten-
tion to settle a colony, and in 1682 he arranged a public
treaty with the Delaware Indians to purchase the lands
that  Philadelphia  and  the  surrounding  settlements
would soon occupy.

Penn’s  Frame  of  Government  (1681)  applied  the
Quakers’  radical  beliefs  to  politics.  It  ensured  reli-
gious  freedom  by  prohibiting  a  legally  established
church, and it promoted political equality by allowing
all  property-owning  men  to  vote  and  hold  office.

Cheered  by  these  provisions,  thousands  of  Quakers,
mostly yeoman families from the northwest Midland
region of England, flocked to Pennsylvania. To attract
European  Protestants,  Penn  published  pamphlets  in
Germany promising cheap land and religious tolera-
tion. In 1683, migrants from Saxony founded German-
town (just outside Philadelphia), and thousands of other
Germans  soon  followed.  Ethnic  diversity,  pacifism,
and  freedom  of  conscience  made  Pennsylvania  the
most open and democratic of the Restoration Colonies.

From Mercantilism to
Imperial Dominion
As Charles II distributed American land, his ministers
devised  policies  to  keep  colonial  trade  in  English
hands. Since the 1560s, the English crown had pursued
mercantilist policies, using government subsidies and
charters  to  stimulate  English  manufacturing  and  for-
eign trade. Now it extended these mercantilist  strategies
to  the  American  settlements  through  the  Navigation
Acts (Table 3.2).

The Navigation Acts  Believing they had to control
trade with the colonies to reap their economic benefits,
English  ministers  wanted  agricultural  goods  and  raw
materials  to  be  carried  to  English  ports  in  English

