84

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

William Penn’s Treaty with the Indians, 1771

Benjamin West executed this famous picture of William Penn’s 1683 meeting with the Lenni-Lenapes, who
called themselves the Common People. A Quaker paciﬁst, Penn refused to seize Indian lands by force and
negotiated their purchase. But his son, Thomas Penn, probably had a political purpose when he commis-
sioned the painting in 1771. By evoking a peaceful past, West’s work reinforced the Penn family’s proprietary
claims, which were under strong attack by the Pennsylvania assembly. Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts,
Philadelphia, USA / The Bridgeman Art Library.

 vessels.  In  reality,  Dutch  and  French  shippers  were
often  buying  sugar  and  other  colonial  products  from
English colonies and carrying them directly into for-
eign markets. To counter this practice, the Navigation
Act  of  1651  required  that  goods  be  carried  on  ships
owned by English or colonial merchants. New parlia-
mentary acts in 1660 and 1663 strengthened the ban
on  foreign  traders:  colonists  could  export  sugar  and
tobacco only to England and import European goods
only  through  England;  moreover,  three-quarters  of
the  crew  on  English  vessels  had
to  be  English.  To  pay  the  cus-
toms officials who enforced these
laws,  the  Revenue  Act  of  1673
imposed  a  “plantation  duty”  on
American  exports  of  sugar  and
tobacco.

PLACE EVENTS IN
CONTEXT
How did the ambitions of
Charles II and James II
remake English North
America?

The English government backed these policies with
military force. In three wars between 1652 and 1674,
the English navy drove the Dutch from New Netherland
and  contested  Holland’s  control  of  the  Atlantic  slave
trade by attacking Dutch forts and ships along the West
African coast. Meanwhile, English merchants expanded
their fleets, which increased in capacity from 150,000
tons  in  1640  to  340,000  tons  in  1690.  This  growth
occurred on both sides of the Atlantic; by 1702, only
London and Bristol had more ships registered in port
than did the town of Boston.

Though colonial ports benefitted from the growth
of English shipping, many colonists violated the Nav-
igation Acts. Planters continued to trade with Dutch
shippers, and New England merchants imported sugar
and molasses from the French West Indies. The Massa-
chusetts  Bay  assembly  boldly   declared:  “The  laws  of

