CHAPTER 3

  The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750

85

TABLE 3.2

Navigation Acts, 1651–1751

Purpose

Act of 1651

Cut Dutch trade

Act of 1660

Act of 1663

Ban foreign shipping; enumerate goods that go only to
England

Allow European imports only through England

Staple Act (1673)

Ensure enumerated goods go only to England

Act of 1696

Prevent frauds; create vice-admiralty courts

Woolen Act (1699)

Prevent export or intercolonial sale of textiles

Hat Act (1732)

Prevent export or intercolonial sale of hats

Compliance

Mostly ignored

Partially obeyed

Partially obeyed

Mostly obeyed

Mostly obeyed

Partially obeyed

Partially obeyed

Molasses Act (1733)

Cut American imports of molasses from French West Indies

Extensively violated

Iron Act (1750)

Prevent manufacture of ﬁnished iron products

Extensively violated

Currency Act (1751)

End use of paper currency as legal tender in New England

Mostly obeyed

England are bounded within the seas [surrounding it]
and  do  not  reach  America.”  Outraged  by  this  inso-
lence,  customs  official  Edward  Randolph  called  for
troops  to  “reduce  Massachusetts  to  obedience.”
Instead, the Lords of Trade — the administrative body
charged with colonial affairs — chose a less violent, but
no less confrontational, strategy. In 1679, it denied the
claim  of  Massachusetts  Bay  to  New  Hampshire  and
eventually  established  a  separate  royal  colony  there.
Then, in 1684, the Lords of Trade persuaded an English
court to annul the Massachusetts Bay charter by charg-
ing  the  Puritan  government  with  violating  the  Nav-
igation  Acts  and  virtually  outlawing  the  Church  of
England.

The  Dominion  of  New  England  The  Puritans’
troubles  had  only  begun,  thanks  to  the  accession  of
King James II (r. 1685–1688), an aggressive and inflex-
ible ruler. During the reign of Oliver Cromwell, James
had  grown  up  in  exile  in  France,  and  he  admired  its
authoritarian  king,  Louis  XIV.  James  wanted  stricter
control  over  the  colonies  and  targeted  New  England
for his reforms. In 1686, the Lords of Trade revoked the
charters of Connecticut and Rhode Island and merged
them with Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth to form a
new royal province, the Dominion of New England. As
governor  of  the  Dominion,  James  II  appointed  Sir
Edmund Andros, a hard-edged former military officer.
Two  years  later,  James  II  added  New  York  and  New
Jersey  to  the  Dominion,  creating  a  vast  colony  that
stretched from Maine to Pennsylvania (Map 3.1).

MAINE
(part of MASS.)

N E W   F R A N C E

St.LawrenceR.

Lake
Ontario

.

R
t
u
c
i
t
c
e
n
n
o
C
NEW YORK

N

E

S

MASSACHUSETTS
BAY

CONNECTICUT

R.I.

Boston

W

PLYMOUTH

.

R
n
o
s
d
u
H

Delawar

e
R
.

PENNSYLVANIA

New York

Philadelphia

(cid:2)

EAST
JERSEY

MARYLAND

WEST
JERSEY

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

0

0

50

100 miles

50

100 kilometers

St. Mary’s
City

VIRGINIA

Dominion of New England

Royal colonies

Proprietary colonies
Political revolts in 1689
      Boston: Overthrow of Governor Andros
      New York: Leisler’s Rebellion
      Maryland: Protestant Association

MAP 3.1
The Dominion of New England, 1686–1689

In the Dominion, James II created a vast royal colony
that stretched nearly 500 miles along the Atlantic coast.
During the Glorious Revolution in England, politicians
and ministers in Boston and New York City led revolts
that ousted Dominion ofﬁcials and repudiated their
authority. King William and Queen Mary replaced
the Dominion with governments that balanced the
power held by imperial authorities and local political
institutions.

