86

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

The  Dominion  extended  to  America  the  authori-
tarian model of colonial rule that the English govern-
ment  had  imposed  on  Catholic  Ireland.  James  II
ordered Governor Andros to abolish the existing legis-
lative  assemblies.  In  Massachusetts,  Andros  banned
town  meetings,  angering  villagers  who  prized  local
self-rule, and advocated public worship in the Church
of  England,  offending  Puritan  Congregationalists.
Even worse, from the colonists’ perspective, the gover-
nor invalidated all land titles granted under the origi-
nal Massachusetts Bay charter. Andros offered to pro-
vide new deeds, but only if the colonists would pay an
annual fee.

The Glorious Revolution in
England and America
Fortunately for the colonists, James II angered English
political leaders as much as Andros alienated colonists.
The  king  revoked  the  charters  of  English  towns,
rejected the advice of Parliament, and aroused popular
opposition  by  openly  practicing  Roman  Catholicism.
Then, in 1688, James’s Spanish Catholic wife gave birth
to a son. To forestall the outcome of having a Catholic
heir to the English throne, Protestant bishops and par-
liamentary leaders in the Whig Party invited William
of  Orange,  a  staunchly  Protestant  Dutch  prince  who
was  married  to  James’s  Protestant  daughter,  Mary
Stuart, to come to England at the head of an invading
army.  With  their  support,  William  led  a  quick  and
nearly  bloodless  coup,  and  King  James  II  was  over-
thrown in an event dubbed the Glorious Revolution by

its  supporters.  Whig  politicians  forced  King  William
and Queen Mary to accept the Declaration of Rights,
creating a constitutional monarchy that enhanced the
powers of the House of Commons at the expense of the
crown.  The  Whigs  wanted  political  power,  especially
the power to levy taxes, to reside in the hands of the
gentry,  merchants,  and  other  substantial  property
owners.

To  justify  their  coup,  the  members  of  Parliament
relied on political philosopher John Locke. In his Two
Treatises  on  Government  (1690),  Locke  rejected  the
divine-right monarchy celebrated by James II, arguing
that the legitimacy of government rests on the consent
of the governed and that individuals have inalienable
natural rights to life, liberty, and property. Locke’s cele-
bration of individual rights and representative govern-
ment had a lasting influence in America, where many
political  leaders  wanted  to  expand  the  powers  of  the
colonial assemblies.

Rebellions  in  America  The  Glorious  Revolution
sparked  rebellions  by  Protestant  colonists  in  Massa-
chusetts, Maryland, and New York. When news of the
coup  reached  Boston  in  April  1689,  Puritan  leaders
and  2,000  militiamen  seized  Governor  Andros  and
shipped  him  back  to  England.  Heeding  American
complaints  of  authoritarian  rule,  the  new  monarchs
broke  up  the  Dominion  of  New  England.  However,
they refused to restore the old Puritan-dominated gov-
ernment of Massachusetts Bay, instead creating in 1692
a  new  royal  colony  (which  included  Plymouth  and
Maine).  The  new  charter  empowered  the  king  to

The Leviathan Absolutist State

This detail from the title-page engraving of
Thomas Hobbes’s Leviathan (1651) conveys
Hobbes’s belief that peace and security
required submission to a powerful sovereign.
In this image, a giant king looms over his
domain, his staff and sword symbolizing his
civil and religious powers. He is the head
of a body made up of the multitudes of his
faceless and voiceless subjects, as they carry
out his commands. What Hobbes celebrated,
a majority of English politicians and people
rejected. Fearing the claims of absolute
power by Stuart kings, they revolted twice,
executing Charles I in 1649 and deposing
James II in 1688. Title page from the first edition
of Thomas Hobbes’s Leviathan, published in 1651.

