CHAPTER 3

  The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750

87

appoint  the  governor  and  customs  officials,  gave  the
vote  to  all  male  property  owners  (not  just  Puritan
church members), and eliminated Puritan restrictions
on the Church of England.

In Maryland, the uprising had economic as well as
religious  causes.  Since  1660,  falling  tobacco  prices
had  hurt  poorer  farmers,  who  were  overwhelmingly
Protestant, while taxes and fees paid to mostly Catholic
proprietary officials continued to rise. When Parliament
ousted James II, a Protestant association mustered 700
men and forcibly removed the Catholic governor. The
Lords of Trade supported this Protestant initiative: they
suspended  Lord  Baltimore’s  proprietorship,  imposed
royal government, and made the Church of England the
legal  religion  in  the  colony.  This  arrangement  lasted
until  1715,  when  Benedict  Calvert,  the  fourth  Lord
Baltimore, converted to the Anglican faith and the king
restored the proprietorship to the Calvert family.

In New York, a Dutchman named Jacob Leisler led
the  rebellion  against  the  Dominion  of  New  England.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the Glorious
Revolution affect relations
between England and its
colonies?

Initially  he  enjoyed  broad  sup-
port, but he soon alienated many
English-speaking  New  Yorkers
and  well-to-do  Dutch  residents.
tactics
Leisler’s  heavy-handed
made  him  vulnerable;  when
William  and  Mary  appointed
Henry  Sloughter  as  governor  in  1691,  Leisler  was
indicted for treason, hanged, and decapitated — an act
of ethnic vengeance that corrupted New York politics
for a generation.

The Glorious Revolution of 1688–1689 began a new
era in the politics of both  Eng land and its American col-
onies. In England, William and Mary ruled as constitu-
tional  monarchs;  overseas,  they  promoted  an  empire
based  on  commerce.  They  accepted  the  overthrow  of
James’s  disastrous  Dominion  of  New  England  and
allowed Massachusetts (under its new charter) and New
York  to  resume  self-government.  In  1696,  Parliament
created  a  new  body,  the  Board  of  Trade,  to  oversee

King William III and Mary II

Rejecting Hobbes’s vision of Leviathan and
James II’s attempts to impose absolutism, a
group of England’s most powerful politicians
invited William of Orange — a prince of the
Dutch Republic — to invade England, depose
James II, and occupy the throne jointly with his
wife Mary. William’s army quickly over threw
James in the so-called Glorious Revolution
of 1688, an event that reverberated across
the Atlantic in rebellions in Massachusetts,
Maryland, and New York. This portrait, from
the Guild Book of the Barber Surgeons of
York, was probably painted to celebrate the
coronation of William and Mary in 1689.
HIP/Art Resource, NY.

