88

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

colonial affairs. While the Board of Trade continued to
pursue the mercantilist policies that made the colonies
economically  beneficial,  otherwise  it  permitted  local
elites to maintain a strong hand in colonial affairs. As
England plunged into a new era of European warfare,
its  leaders  had  little  choice  but  to  allow  its  colonies
substantial autonomy.

Imperial Wars and
Native Peoples
The  price  that  England  paid  for  bringing  William  of
Orange to the throne was a new commitment to war-
fare on the continent. England wanted William because
of his unambiguous Protestant commitments; William
wanted England because of the resources it could bring
to bear in European wars. Beginning with the War of
the League of Augsburg in 1689, England embarked on
an  era  sometimes  called  the  Second  Hundred  Years’
War,  which  lasted  until  the  defeat  of  Napoleon  at
Waterloo in 1815. In that time, Eng land (Britain after
1707)  fought  in  seven  major  wars;  the  longest  era  of
peace lasted only twenty-six years (Table 3.3).

Imperial  wars  transformed  North  America.  Prior
to  1689,  American  affairs  were  distant  from  those  of
Europe, but the recurrent wars of the eighteenth cen-
tury spilled over repeatedly into the colonies. Govern-
ments were forced to arm themselves and create new

alliances  with  neighboring  Native  Americans,  who
tried  to  turn  the  fighting  to  their  own  advantage.
Although  war  brought  money  to  the  American  colo-
nies  in  the  form  of  war  contracts,  it  also  placed  new
demands  on  colonial  governments  to  support  the
increasingly  militant  British  Empire.  To  win  wars  in
Western Europe, the Caribbean, and far-flung oceans,
British  leaders  created  a  powerful  central  state  that
spent  three-quarters  of  its  revenue  on  military  and
naval expenses.

Tribalization
For Native Americans, the rise of war intersected with a
process  scholars  have  called  tribalization:  the  adapta-
tion  of  stateless  peoples  to  the  demands  imposed  on
them by neighboring states. In North America, tribal-
ization  occurred
in  catastrophic  circumstances.
Eurasian  diseases  rapidly  killed  off  broad  swaths  of
native communities, disproportionately victimizing the
old  and  the  very  young.  In  oral  cultures,  old  people
were irreplaceable repositories of knowledge, while the
young were quite literally the future. With populations
in free fall, many polities disappeared altogether. By the
eighteenth  century,  the  groups  that  survived  had  all
been transformed. Many were polyglot peoples: Some
new  tribes,  like  the  Catawbas,  had  not  existed  before
and  were  pieced  together  from  remnants  of  formerly
large groups. Other nations, like the Iroquois, declined
in numbers but sustained themselves by adopting many

TABLE 3.3

English Wars, 1650–1750

War

Date

Purpose

Result

Anglo-Dutch

1652–1654

Anglo-Dutch

Anglo-Dutch

1664

1673

King William’s

1689–1697

Queen Anne’s

1702–1713

Jenkins’s Ear

1739–1741

King George’s

1740–1748

Control markets and
African slave trade

Stalemate

Markets; conquest

England takes New Amsterdam

Commercial markets

England makes maritime gains

Maintain European balance
of power

Stalemate in North America

Maintain European balance
of power

British acquire Hudson Bay and
Nova Scotia

Expand markets in
Spanish America

English merchants expand
inﬂuence

Maintain European balance
of power

Capture and return of Louisbourg

