CHAPTER 3

  The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750

89

war  captives.  In  the  Carolina  borderlands,  a  large
 number  of  Muskogean-speaking  communities  came
together as a nation known to the British as the “Creek”
Indians,  so  named  because  some  of  them  lived  on
Ochese Creek. Similarly, the Cherokees, the Delawares,
and other groups that were culturally linked but politi-
cally fragmented became coherent “tribes” to deal more
effectively with their European neighbors.

The rise of imperial warfare exposed Native Amer-
ican  communities  to  danger,  but  it  also  gave  them
newfound leverage. The Iroquois were radically endan-
gered by imperial conflict: a promised English alliance
failed them, and in 1693 a combined force of French
soldiers, militiamen, and their Indian allies burned all
three  Mohawk  villages  to  the  ground.  Thereafter,  the
Iroquois  devised  a  strategy  for  playing  French  and
English interests off against each other. In 1701, they
made  alliances  with  both  empires,  declaring  their
intention to remain neutral in future conflicts between

them. This  did  not  mean  that  the  Iroquois  stayed  on
the  sideline:  Iroquois  warriors  often  participated  in
raids  during  wartime,  and  Iroquois  spokesmen  met
regularly  with  representatives  of  New  York  and  New
France to affirm their alliances and receive diplomatic
gifts  that  included  guns,  powder,  lead,  clothing,  and
rum  (from  the  British) or  brandy  (from  the  French).
Their  neutrality,  paradoxically,  made  them  more
sought after as allies. For example, their alliance with
New York, known as the Covenant Chain, soon became
a model for relations between the British Empire and
other Native American peoples.

Imperial warfare also reshaped Indian relations in
the Southeast. During the War of the Spanish Succes-
sion (1702–1713), which pitted Britain against France
and Spain, English settlers in the Carolinas armed the
Creeks, whose 15,000 members farmed the fertile lands
along the present-day border of Georgia and Alabama.
A  joint  English-Creek  expedition   attacked  Spanish

The “Four Indian Kings” in London, 1710

After a failed invasion of Canada in 1709, a colonial
delegation went to London to ask the queen to try
again. They brought four Indians with them — three
Mohawks and a Mahican — and presented them in
London as the “Four Indian Kings” of the Iroquois.
The four kings met Queen Anne, dined with
nobility, attended the theater, and toured the sites.
They sat for several portraits, which were engraved
for prints like this one. The queen agreed to make
another try for Canada, but the 1711 invasion
failed again. Albany Institute of History and Art, Gift
of the Estate of Cornelia Cogswell (Mrs. Henry M. Sage)
1972.65.7.

