90

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

Florida, burning the town of St. Augustine but failing
to capture the fort. To protect Havana in nearby Cuba,
the  Spanish  reinforced  St.  Augustine  and  unsuccess-
fully attacked Charleston, South Carolina.

of Gibraltar at the entrance to the Mediterranean and
a thirty-year contract to supply slaves to Spanish Amer-
ica. These gains advanced Britain’s quest for commer-
cial  supremacy  and  brought  peace  to  eastern  North
America for a generation (Map 3.2).

Indian Goals
The Creeks had their own agenda: to become the dom-
inant tribe in the region, they needed to vanquish their
longtime  enemies,  the  pro-French  Choctaws  to  the
west  and  the  Spanish-allied  Apalachees  to  the  south.
Beginning in 1704, a force of Creek and Yamasee war-
riors destroyed the remaining Franciscan missions in
northern  Florida,  attacked  the  Spanish  settlement  at
Pensacola, and captured a thousand Apalachees, whom
they sold to South Carolinian slave traders for sale in
the West Indies. Simultaneously, a Carolina-supported
Creek  expedition  attacked  the  Iroquois-speaking
Tuscarora people of North Carolina, killing hundreds,
executing 160 male captives, and sending 400 women
and  children  into  slavery.  The  surviving  Tuscaroras
joined the Iroquois in New York (who now became the
Six Nations of the Iroquois). The  Carolinians, having
used the Creeks to kill Spaniards, now died at the hands
of their former allies: when English traders demanded
payment  for  trade  debts  in  1715,  the  Creeks  and
Yamasees  revolted,  killing  400  colonists  before  being
overwhelmed by the Carolinians and their new Indian
allies, the Cherokees.

UNDERSTAND POINTS
OF VIEW
What did Native Americans
have to gain by participat-
ing in imperial wars?

Native  Americans  also  joined
in  the  warfare  between  French
Catholics  in  Canada  and  English
in  New  England.
Protestants
With  French
aid,  Catholic
Mohawk  and  Abenaki  warriors
took  revenge  on  their  Puritan
enemies. They destroyed English settlements in Maine
and, in 1704, attacked the western Massachusetts town
of Deerfield, where they killed 48 residents and carried
112  into  captivity.  In  response,  New  England  militia
attacked French settlements and, in 1710, joined with
British  naval  forces  to  seize  Port  Royal  in  French
Acadia (Nova Scotia). However, a major British–New
England  expedition  against  the  French  stronghold  at
Quebec,  inspired  in  part  by  the  visit  of  four  Indian
“kings” to London, failed miserably.

Stalemated  militarily  in  America,  Britain  won
major territorial and commercial concessions through
its victories in Europe. In the Treaty of Utrecht (1713),
Britain  obtained  Newfoundland,  Acadia,  and  the
Hudson Bay region of northern Canada from France,
as well as access through Albany to the western Indian
trade. From Spain, Britain acquired the strategic fortress

The Imperial Slave Economy
Britain’s focus on America reflected the growth of a new
agricultural and commercial order — the South Atlantic
System — that produced sugar, tobacco, rice, and other
tropical  and  subtropical  products  for  an  international
market. Its plantation societies were ruled by European
planter-merchants  and  worked  by  hundreds  of  thou-
sands of enslaved Africans (Figure 3.1).

The South Atlantic System
The South Atlantic System had its center in Brazil and
the  West  Indies,  and  sugar  was  its  primary  product.
Before 1500, there were few sweet foods in Europe —
mostly honey and fruits — so when European planters
developed vast sugarcane plantations in America, they
found a ready market for their crop. (The craving for
the potent new sweet food was so intense that, by 1900,
sugar  accounted  for  an  astonishing  20  percent  of  the
calories consumed by the world’s people.)

European  merchants,

investors,  and  planters
garnered the profits of the South Atlantic System. Fol-
low ing mercantilist principles, they provided the plan-
tations with tools and equipment to grow and process
the  sugarcane  and  ships  to  carry  it  to  Europe.  But  it
was the Atlantic slave trade that made the system run.
Between  1520  and  1650,  Portuguese  traders  carried
about  820,000  Africans  across  the  Atlantic — about
4,000  slaves  a  year  before  1600  and  10,000  annually
thereafter. Over the next half century, the Dutch dom-
inated the Atlantic slave trade; then, between 1700 and
1800, the British transported about 2.5 million of the
total of 6.1 million Africans carried to the Americas.

England and the West Indies  England was a late-
comer to the plantation economy, but from the begin-
ning the prospect of a  lucrative cash crop drew large
numbers of migrants. On St. Kitts, Nevis, Montserrat,
and  Barbados,  most  early  settlers  were  small-scale
English  farmers  (and  their  indentured  servants)  who
exported  tobacco  and  livestock  hides;  on  this  basis,
they created small but thriving colonies. In 1650, there
were more English residents in the West Indies (some
44,000)  than  in  the  Chesapeake  (20,000)  and  New
England (23,000) colonies combined.

