CHAPTER 3

  The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750

91

The date of the map is important. The Treaty of Utrecht, which
ended Queen Anne’s War in 1713, transferred Acadia (Nova Scotia)
and Newfoundland from France to Britain.

Newfoundland

claimed by
England
and France

Nova
Scotia

British Colonies: Comparisons
Proprietary

Corporate

Royal

Population
White       Black

Average Annual
Exports,
1698–1717

Exports
per White
 (shillings)*

West Indian islands
Southern mainland
Northern mainland

27,000
114,000
177,000

122,000
37,000
3,000

£700,000
£220,000
£135,000

538s.
39s.
15s.

*(20 shillings = £1 [1 English pound]; £1 in 1715 = about $400 in 2010)

Hudson
Bay

HUDSON’S BAY COMPANY

claimed by England and France

E

C

A

N

S
E
I
N
O
L
O
C
H
S
I
T
I
R
B

R

F

W

E

claimed by England and France

claimed by
England and Spain

N

MEXICO

Gulf of Mexico

FLORIDA
(Sp.)

BAHAMAS (Br.)

CUBA
(Sp.)

This map has three main elements. First, it shows the
geographic extent of Britain’s American possessions.
Next, it provides a table showing the racial composition
and value of exports of the three main regions. Third, it
depicts the form of government in the various colonies.

SANTO DOMINGO
(Sp.)

Guadeloupe
(Fr.)

Martinique
(Fr.)

Barbados
(Br.)

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

N

W

E

S

BELIZE

JAMAICA
(Br.)

ST. DOMINIQUE
(Fr.)

Puerto
Rico
(Sp.)

C a r i b b e a n   S e a

Sugar and slavery are key to a full understanding of
this map. They explain the high value of exports
produced by the tiny Caribbean islands.

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

MAP 3.2
Britain’s American Empire, 1713

Many of Britain’s possessions in the West Indies were tiny islands, mere dots on the Caribbean Sea.
However, in 1713, these small pieces of land were by far the most valuable parts of the empire.
Their sugar crops brought wealth to English merchants, commerce to the northern colonies,
and a brutal life and early death to the hundreds of thousands of African slaves working on
the plantations.

After  1650,  sugar  transformed  Barbados  and  the
other  islands  into  slave-based  plantation  societies,  a
change facilitated by English capital combined with the
knowledge  and  experience  of  Dutch  merchants.  By
1680, an elite group of 175 planters, described by one
antislavery writer of the time as “inhumane and barba-
rous,”  dominated  Barbados’s  economy;  they  owned
more than half of the island, thousands of indentured
servants,  and  half  of  its  more  than  50,000  slaves.  In
1692, exploited Irish servants and island-born African
slaves staged a major uprising, which was brutally sup-
pressed.  The  “leading  principle”  in  a  slave  society,
declared one West Indian planter, was to instill “fear”

among workers and a commitment to “absolute coer-
cive”  force  among  masters.  As  social  inequality  and
racial conflict increased, hundreds of English farmers
fled to South Carolina and the large island of Jamaica.
But  the  days  of  Caribbean  smallholders  were  num-
bered. English sugar merchants soon invested heavily
in Jamaica; by 1750, it had seven hundred large sugar
plantations, worked by more than 105,000 slaves, and
had become the wealthiest British colony.

Sugar was a rich man’s crop because it could be pro-
duced  most  efficiently  on  large  plantations.  Scores  of
slaves planted and cut the sugarcane, which was then
processed  by  expensive  equipment — crushing  mills,

