92

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

Number of Africans arriving
alive in the Americas and Europe
9,645,000

British North America
500,000

Europe
175,000

Dutch America
500,000

Spanish Central America

1,500,000

Portuguese
Brazil
3,650,000

West Indies

British
1,660,000

French
1,660,000

Approx. 14% died on slave ships

FIGURE 3.1
The Transit of Africans to the Americas

Though approximately 11 million enslaved Africans
boarded ships to the Americas, about 1.5 million
(14 percent) of them died en route. Two-thirds of the
survivors ended up in Brazil (3.65 million) and the West
Indies (3.32 million), where they worked primarily on
sugar plantations. Half a million arrived directly from
Africa in the present-day United States, while many
thousands more were traded to the mainland from
the West Indies.

boiling  houses,  distilling  apparatus — into  raw  sugar,
molasses,  and  rum.  The  affluent  planter-merchants
who controlled the sugar industry drew annual profits
of  more  than  10  percent  on  their  investment.  As
Scottish economist Adam Smith noted in his famous
treatise  The  Wealth  of  Nations  (1776),  sugar  was  the
most profitable crop grown in America or Europe.

The Impact on Britain  The South Atlantic System
brought  wealth  to  the  entire  British  and  European
economy  and  helped  Europeans  achieve  world  eco-
nomic  leadership.  Most  British  West  Indian  planta-
tions  belonged  to  absentee  owners  who  lived  in
England,  where  they  spent  their  profits  and  formed
lobby.  The
a  powerful  sugar
Navigation  Acts  kept  the  British
sugar  trade
in  the  hands  of
British  merchants,  who  exported
it to foreign markets, and by 1750
reshipments  of  American  sugar

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the South Atlantic
System affect the British
economy?

and  tobacco  to  Europe  accounted  for  half  of  British
exports.  Enormous  profits  also  flowed  into  Britain
from the slave trade. The value of the guns, iron, rum,
and cloth that were used to buy slaves was only about
one-tenth (in the 1680s) to one-third (by the 1780s) of
the  value  of  the  crops  those  slaves  produced  in
America, allowing English traders to sell slaves in the
West Indies for three to five times what they paid for
them in Africa.

These massive profits drove the slave trade. At  its
height  in  the  1790s,  Britain  annually  exported  three
hundred  thousand  guns  to  Africa,  and  a  British  ship
carrying  300  to  350  slaves  left  an  African  port  every
other day. This commerce stimulated the entire British
economy.  English,  Scottish,  and  American  shipyards
built  hundreds  of  vessels,  and  thousands  of  people
worked in trade-related industries: building port facil-
ities and warehouses, refining sugar and tobacco, dis-
tilling rum from molasses, and manufacturing textiles
and  iron  products  for  the  growing  markets  in  Africa
and  America.  More  than  one  thousand  British  mer-
chant ships were plying the Atlantic by 1750, providing
a supply of experienced sailors and laying the founda-
tion for the supremacy of the Royal Navy.

Africa, Africans, and the Slave Trade
As  the  South  Atlantic  System  enhanced  European
prosperity,  it  imposed  enormous  costs  on  West  and
Central  Africa.  Between  1550  and  1870,  the  Atlantic
slave  trade  uprooted  11  million  Africans,  draining
lands  south  of  the  Sahara  of  people  and  wealth  and
changing African society (Map 3.3). By directing com-
merce away from the savannas and the Islamic world
on the other side of the Sahara, the Atlantic slave trade
changed  the  economic  and  religious  dynamics of  the
African interior. It also fostered militaristic, centralized
states in the coastal areas.

Africans  and  the  Slave Trade  Warfare  and  slaving
had  been  part  of  African  life  for  centuries,  but  the
South Atlantic System made slaving a favorite tactic of
ambitious kings and plundering warlords. “Whenever
the  King  of  Barsally  wants  Goods  or  Brandy,”  an
observer noted, “the King goes and ransacks some of
his  enemies’  towns,  seizing  the  people  and  selling
them.”  Supplying  slaves  became  a  way  of  life  in  the
West African state of Dahomey, where the royal house
monopolized  the  sale  of  slaves  and  used  European
guns to create a military despotism. Dahomey’s army,
which included  a  contingent  of  5,000  women, raided
the  interior  for  captives;  between  1680  and  1730,
Dahomey  annually  exported  20,000  slaves  from  the

