CHAPTER 3

  The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750

93

Niger
R.

Map
Area

________
BOBANGI

UbangiR.

Congo R.

BRAKNA

Timbuktu

(cid:2)

St. Louis

TRARZA
SenegalR.
WALO
CAYOR

(cid:2)

Cape Verde

110,000

(cid:2)

Gorée (Dakar)

WOLOF

BAOL

JOLOF

SERER
SINE
SALUM WULI

BUNDU

MANDING

Îles de Los

(cid:2)

1.1 million

Bance Is.

SIERRA
LEONE
(cid:2)

GHANA

NigerR.

FULA

WhiteVolt

MOSSI

a
R
.

B
l
a
c
k
V
olta
R.

BORGU

MAHI

Sherbro

(cid:2)

SUSU
MENDE

GOLA

WINDWARDCOAST

KRU

(cid:2)

Kumasi
(cid:2)

ASANTE
EMPIRE
CapeCoast
Accra
Elmina
Axim
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
IVORYCOAST GOLD
COAST

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Whydah

OLD

OYO
YORUBA

DAHOMEY
(cid:2)

(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:2)
SLAVE
COAST

Allada
BENIN
(cid:2)
Lagos
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

Bight of
Benin

Forcados
Brass

Little Sestos

500,000

1.5 million +

Bight of
Biafra

São Tomé

HAUSA

HAUSA

BenueR.

TIV

AROCHUKWU

(cid:2)(cid:2)

Calabar

(cid:2)
Bonny

110,000

Numbers denote
slaves shipped,
1700–1810

UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA
(cid:4)

Charleston

1.5 million +

1.5 million +

NEW
SPAIN

(cid:4)
New
Orleans

(cid:4)
Mexico City

PACIFIC
OCEAN

Slave importation
areas in the New
World, c. 1800

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

NEW
GRANADA

(cid:4)

Recife

(cid:4)

Rio de Janeiro

PERU

BRAZIL

RIO DE
LA PLATA

(cid:4)

Buenos Aires

0

0

500

1,000 miles

500 1,000 kilometers

LOANGO
________
(cid:2)

Loango
Bay
Malemba

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Cabinda

TEKE
R.
o
g
n

Co

KasaiR.

_______
KONGO

1.5 million +

Luanda

(cid:2)

________
NDONGO

LUANDA

KASANJE

MBUNDU

Benguela

(cid:2)

OVIMBUNDU

Tropical rain forest
Savanna
Desert
Major slave depots
Kingdoms
Important suppliers
Peoples

(cid:2)

GHANA
KONGO
_______

HAUSA

0

0

300

600 miles

300

600 kilometers

W

N

S

E

MAP 3.3
Africa and the Atlantic Slave Trade, 1700–1810

The tropical rain forest of West Africa was home to scores of peoples and dozens of kingdoms.
With the rise of the slave trade, some of these kingdoms became aggressive slavers. Dahomey’s
army, for example, seized tens of thousands of captives in wars with neighboring peoples and
sold them to European traders. About 14 percent of the captives died during the grueling Middle
Passage, the transatlantic voyage between Africa and the Americas. Most of the survivors labored
on sugar plantations in Brazil and the British and French West Indies.

ports of Allada and Whydah. The Asante kings likewise
used slaving to conquer states along the Gold Coast as
well as Muslim kingdoms in the savanna. By the 1720s,
they had  created a prosperous empire of 3 to 5 million
people. Yet participation in the transatlantic slave trade
remained  a  choice  for  Africans,  not  a  necessity.  The
powerful kingdom of Benin, famous for its cast bronzes

and carved ivory, prohibited for decades the export of
all slaves, male and female. Other Africans atoned for
their guilt for selling neighbors into slavery by building
hidden shrines, often in the household granary.

The  trade  in  humans  produced  untold  misery.
Hundreds  of  thousands  of  young  Africans  died,  and
millions more endured a brutal life in the Americas. In

