94

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

Africa itself, class divisions hardened as people of noble
birth enslaved and sold those of lesser status. Gender
relations shifted as well. Two-thirds of the slaves sent
across the Atlantic were men, partly because European
planters paid more for men and “stout men boys” and
partly  because  Africans  sold  enslaved  women  locally
and  across  the  Sahara  as  agricultural  workers,  house
servants, and concubines. The resulting sexual imbal-
ance  prompted  African  men  to  take  several  wives,
changing the meaning of marriage. Finally, the expan-
sion of the Atlantic slave trade increased the extent of
slavery in Africa. Sultan Mawlay Ismail of Morocco (r.
1672–1727)  owned  150,000  black  slaves,  obtained  by
trade in Timbuktu and in wars he waged in Senegal. In

Africa, as in the Americas, slavery eroded the dignity
of human life.

The  Middle  Passage  and  Beyond  Africans  sold
into  the  South  Atlantic  System  suffered  the  bleakest
fate.  Torn  from  their  villages,  they  were  marched  in
chains  to  coastal  ports,  their  first  passage  in  slavery.
Then they endured the perilous Middle Passage to the
New World in hideously overcrowded ships. The cap-
tives  had  little  to  eat  or  drink,  and  some  died  from
dehydration.  The  feces,  urine,  and  vomit  belowdecks
prompted  outbreaks  of  dysentery,  which  took  more
lives. “I was so overcome by the heat, stench, and foul
air that I nearly fainted,” reported a European doctor.

Two Views of the Middle Passage

An 1846 watercolor (on the right) shows the cargo hold of a slave ship en route to Brazil, which imported
large numbers of African slaves until the 1860s. Painted by a ship’s ofﬁcer, the work minimizes the brutality
of the Middle Passage — none of the slaves are in chains — and captures the Africans’ humanity and dignity.
The illustration on the left, which was printed by England’s Abolitionist Society, shows the plan of a Liverpool
slave ship designed to hold 482 Africans, packed in with no more respect than that given to hogsheads of
sugar and tobacco. Records indicate that the ship actually carried as many as 609 Africans at once. Private
Collection/© Michael Graham-Stewart/The Bridgeman Art Library / © National Maritime Museum, London.

