A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Olaudah Equiano: The

Brutal “Middle

Passage”

Olaudah Equiano claimed to have been born in Igboland (present-day southern
Nigeria).  But  Vincent  Carretta  of  the  University  of  Maryland  has  discovered
strong  evidence  that  Equiano  was  born  in  South  Carolina.  He  suggests  that
Equiano  drew  on  conversations  with  African-born  slaves  to  create  a  ﬁctitious
account of his kidnapping at the age of eleven and a traumatic passage across
the Atlantic. After being purchased by an English sea captain, Equiano bought
his freedom in 1766. In London, he became an antislavery activist, and in 1789 he
published the memoir from which the following selections are drawn.

My father, besides many slaves, had a numerous fam-
ily. . . . I was trained up from my earliest years in the art
of war, . . . and my mother adorned me with emblems
after the manner of our greatest warriors. One day, when
all our people were gone out to their works as usual and
only I and my dear sister were left to mind the house, two
men and a woman got over our walls, and in a moment
seized us both. . . .

I was . . . sold and carried through a number of places
till . . . at the end of six or seven months after I had been
kidnapped I arrived at the sea coast.

. . . I now saw myself deprived of all chance of return-
ing to my native country. . . . I was soon put down under
the decks, and there I received such a salutation in my
nostrils as I had never experienced in my life; so that
with the loathsomeness of the stench and crying
together, I became so sick and low that I was not
able to eat, nor had I the least desire to taste anything.
I now wished for the last friend, death, to relieve me;
but soon, to my grief, two of the white men offered me
eatables, and on my refusing to eat, one of them held
me fast by the hands and . . . tied my feet while the
other flogged me severely. I had never experienced
anything of this kind before, and . . . could I have
got over the nettings, I would have jumped over

the side. . . . One day, when we had a smooth sea and
moderate wind, two of my wearied countrymen who
were chained together . . . , preferring death to such a
life of misery, somehow made it through the nettings
and jumped into the sea. . . .

At last we came in sight of the island of Barbados; the
white people got some old slaves from the land to pacify
us. They told us we were not to be eaten but to work, and
were soon to go on land where we should see many of our
country people. This report eased us much; and sure
enough soon after we were landed there came to us
 Africans of all languages.

Source: The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, or Gustavus Vassa, the
African, Written by Himself (London, 1789), 15, 22–23, 28–29.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  What elements of Equiano’s account might explain the
average slave mortality rate of about 14 percent during
the Atlantic crossing?

2.  Assuming that Carretta is correct, and Equiano was not
born in Africa, why do you think he composed this ﬁcti-
tious narrative of his childhood instead of describing his
own childhood in slavery?

Some slaves  jumped overboard to drown rather than
endure more suffering. Others staged violent shipboard
revolts. Slave uprisings occurred on two thousand voy-
ages, roughly one of every ten Atlantic passages. Nearly
100,000 slaves died in these insurrections, and nearly
1.5  million  others — about  14  percent  of  those  who
were  transported — died  of  disease  or  illness  on  the
month-long journey (America Compared, above).

For  those  who  survived  the  Atlantic  crossing,
things  only  got  worse  as  they  passed  into  endless
 slavery.  Life  on  the  sugar  plantations  of  northwest-
ern  Brazil  and  the  West  Indies  was  one  of  relentless

 exploitation. Slaves worked ten hours a day under the
hot  tropical  sun;  slept  in  flimsy  huts;  and  lived  on  a
starchy  diet  of  corn, yams,  and  dried  fish. They  were
subjected to brutal discipline: “The fear of punishment
is the principle [we use] . . . to keep them in awe and
order,” one planter declared. When punishments came,
they  were  brutal.  Flogging  was  commonplace;  some
planters  rubbed  salt,  lemon  juice,  or  urine  into  the
resulting wounds.

Planters  often  took  advantage  of  their  power  by
raping  enslaved  women.  Sexual  exploitation  was  a
largely  unacknowledged  but  ubiquitous  feature  of

95

