96

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 master-slave relations: something that many slave mas-
ters considered to be an unquestioned privilege of their
position.  “It  was  almost  a  constant  practice  with  our
clerks, and other whites,” Olaudah Equiano wrote, “to
commit  violent  depredations  on  the  chastity  of  the
 female  slaves.”  Thomas  Thistlewood  was  a  Jamaica
planter  who  kept  an  unusually  detailed  journal  in
which  he  noted  every  act  of  sexual  exploitation  he
committed. In thirty-seven years as a Jamaica planter,
Thistlewood recorded 3,852 sex acts with 138 enslaved
women.

With sugar prices high and the cost of slaves low,
many planters simply worked their slaves to death and
then  bought  more.  Between  1708  and  1735,  British
planters on Barbados imported about 85,000 Africans;
however, in that same time the island’s  black popula-
tion increased by only 4,000 (from 42,000 to 46,000).
The constant influx of new slaves kept the population
thoroughly  “African”  in  its  languages,  religions,  and
culture. “Here,” wrote a Jamaican observer, “each dif-
ferent nation of Africa meet and dance after the man-
ner of their own country . . . [and] retain most of their
native customs.”

Slavery in the Chesapeake
and South Carolina
West  Indian–style  slavery  came  to  Virginia  and
Maryland following Bacon’s Rebellion. Taking advan-
tage of the expansion of the British slave trade (follow-
ing the end of the Royal African Company’s monopoly
in 1698), elite planter-politicians led a “tobacco revolu-
tion” and bought more Africans, putting these slaves to
work  on  ever-larger  plantations.  By  1720,  Africans
made up 20 percent of the Chesapeake population; by
1740,  nearly  40  percent.  Slavery  had  become  a  core
institution, no longer just one of several forms of unfree
labor.  Moreover,  slavery  was  now  defined  in  racial
terms.  Virginia  legislators  prohibited  sexual  inter-
course between English and Africans and defined vir-
tually  all  resident  Africans  as  slaves:  “All  servants
imported or brought into this country by sea or land
who were not Christians in their native country shall
be accounted and be slaves.”

On  the  mainland  as  in  the  islands,  slavery  was  a
system of brutal exploitation. Violence was common,
and  the  threat  of  violence  always  hung  over  master-
slave  relationships.  In  1669,  Virginia’s  House  of
Burgesses decreed that a master who killed a slave in
the process of “correcting” him could not be charged
with a felony, since it would be irrational to destroy his
own property. From that point forward, even the most
extreme  punishments  were  permitted  by  law.  Slaves

could not carry weapons or gather in large numbers.
Slaveholders were especially concerned to discourage
slaves from running away. Punishments for runaways
commonly included not only brutal whipping but also
branding or scarring to make recalcitrant slaves easier
to identify. Virginia laws spelled out the procedures for
capturing and returning runaway slaves in detail. If a
runaway slave was killed in the process of recapturing
him, the county would reimburse the slave’s owner for
his full value. In some cases, slave owners could choose
to put runaway slaves up for trial; if they were found
guilty and executed, the owner would be compensated
for his loss (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 98).

Despite  the  inherent  brutality  of  the  institution,
slaves in Virginia and Maryland worked under better
conditions than those in the West Indies. Many lived
relatively long lives. Unlike sugar and rice, which were
“killer crops” that demanded strenuous labor in a trop-
ical climate, tobacco cultivation required steadier and
less  demanding  labor  in  a  more  temperate  environ-
ment.  Workers  planted  young  tobacco  seedlings  in
spring, hoed and weeded the crop in summer, and in
fall picked and hung the leaves to cure over the winter.
Nor  did  diseases  spread  as  easily  in  the  Chesapeake,
because  plantation  quarters  were  less  crowded  and
more dispersed than those in the West Indies. Finally,
because  tobacco  profits  were  lower  than  those  from
sugar,  planters  treated  their  slaves  less  harshly  than
West Indian planters did.

Many  tobacco  planters  increased  their  workforce
by buying female slaves and encouraging them to have
children.  In  1720,  women  made  up  more  than  one-
third of the Africans in Maryland, and the black popu-
lation  had  begun  to  increase  naturally.  “Be  kind  and
indulgent  to  the  breeding  wenches,”  one  slave  owner
told his overseer, “[and do not] force them when with
child upon any service or hardship that will be injuri-
ous to them.” By midcentury, more than three-quarters
of  the  enslaved  workers  in  the  Chesapeake  were
American-born.

Slaves in South Carolina labored under much more
oppressive  conditions.  The  colony  grew  slowly  until
1700, when planters began to plant and export rice to
southern  Europe,  where  it  was  in  great  demand.
Between  1720  and  1750,  rice  production  increased
fivefold.  To  expand  production,  planters  imported
thousands of Africans, some of them from rice-growing
societies.  By  1710,  Africans  formed  a  majority  of  the
total population, eventually rising to 80 percent in rice-
growing areas (Figure 3.2).

Most rice plantations lay in inland swamps, and the
work  was  dangerous  and  exhausting.  Slaves  planted,
weeded,  and  harvested  the  rice  in  ankle-deep  mud.

