Blacks

Whites

Black
majority

40,000

30,000

20,000

10,000

0

1700

1710

1720

1730

1740

FIGURE 3.2
A Black Majority Emerges in South Carolina, 1700–1740

Between disease and the toll taken by the Indian wars,
South Carolina’s white population hardly grew at all
between 1690 and 1720. But white planters imported
thousands of enslaved Africans to grow rice, an extremely
proﬁtable plantation crop. As early as 1705, the colony
had a black majority, which allowed the development
among slaves of a strongly African-inﬂuenced language
and culture.

Pools of stagnant water bred mosquitoes, which trans-
mitted diseases that claimed hundreds of African lives.
Other slaves, forced to move tons of dirt to build irriga-
tion works, died from exhaustion. “The labour required
[for  growing  rice]  is  only  fit  for  slaves,”  a  Scottish
 traveler remarked, “and I think the hardest work I have
seen  them  engaged  in.”  In  South  Carolina,  as  in  the
West Indies and Brazil, there were many slave deaths
and few births, and the arrival of new slaves continu-
ally “re-Africanized” the black population.

An African American
Community Emerges
Slaves came from many peoples in West Africa and the
Central African regions of Kongo and Angola. White
planters  welcomed  ethnic  diversity  to  deter  slave
revolts.  “The  safety  of  the  Plantations,”  declared  a
widely read English pamphlet, “depends upon having
Negroes  from  all  parts  of  Guiny,  who  do  not  under-
stand each other’s languages and Customs and cannot
agree to Rebel.” By accident or design, most plantations
drew  laborers  of  many  languages,  including  Kwa,
Mande, and Kikongo. Among Africans imported after

CHAPTER 3

  The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750

97

1730  into  the  upper  James  River  region  of  Virginia,
41  percent  came  from  ethnic  groups  in  present-day
Nigeria,  and  another  25  percent  from  West-Central
Africa. The rest hailed from the Windward and Gold
coasts, Senegambia, and Sierra Leone. In South Carolina,
plantation  owners  preferred  laborers  from  the  Gold
Coast and Gambia, who had a reputation as hardwork-
ing  farmers.  But  as  African  sources  of  slaves  shifted
southward after 1730, more than 30 percent of the col-
ony’s workers later came from Kongo and Angola.

Initially, the slaves did not think of themselves as
Africans or blacks but as members of a specific family,
clan,  or  people — Wolof,  Hausa,  Ibo,  Yoruba,  Teke,
Ngola — and  they  sought  out  those  who  shared  their
language and customs. In the upper James River region,
Ibo men and women arrived in equal numbers, mar-
ried  each  other,  and  maintained  their  Ibo  culture.  In
most places, though, this was impossible. Slaves from
varying  backgrounds  were  thrown  together  and  only
gradually discovered common ground.

Building  Community  Through  painful  trial  and
error,  slaves  eventually  discovered  what  limited  free-
doms their owners would allow them. Those who were
not too rebellious or too recalcitrant were able to carve
out precarious family lives — though they were always
in danger of being disrupted by sale or life-threatening
punishment — and  build  the  rudiments  of  a  slave
community.

One key to the development of families and com-
munities  was  a  more  or  less  balanced  sex  ratio  that
encouraged marriage and family formation. In South
Carolina,  the  high  death  rate  among  slaves  under-
mined ties of family and kinship; but in the Chesapeake,
after 1725 some slaves, especially on larger plantations,
were able to create strong nuclear families and extended
kin  relations.  On  one  of  Charles  Carroll’s  estates  in
Maryland, 98 of the 128 slaves were members of two
extended families. These African American kin groups
passed on family names, traditions, and knowledge to
the next generation, and thus a distinct culture gradu-
ally developed. As one observer suggested, blacks had
created a separate world, “a Nation within a Nation.”

As the slaves forged a new identity, they carried on
certain  African  practices  but  let  others  go.  Many
in  America
Africans  arrived
with  ritual  scars
that  white
planters  called  “country  mark-
ings”;  these  signs  of  ethnic  iden-
tity  fell  into  disuse  on  culturally
diverse  plantations.  (Ironi cally,
on  some  plantations  these  Afri-
can  markings  were  replaced  by

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did the experiences
of slaves in the Chesa-
peake differ from their
experiences in South
Carolina?

