T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Servitude and Slavery

Britain’s American colonies relied heavily on bound labor. Two forms predomi-
nated: indentured servitude and African slavery. The idea of being bound to a
master is alien to most of us today; the following texts allow us to glimpse some
aspects of the experience. In what ways were these two institutions similar, and
how did they differ?

1.  Slave advertisement from Charlestown, Virginia,

July 24, 1769.

A Poor Unhappy Transported Felon’s Sorrowful
 Account of His Fourteen Years’ Transportation
at Virginia, in America (1680).

At last to my new master’s house I came,
At the town of Wicocc[o]moco call’d by name,
Where my Europian clothes were took from me,
Which never after I again could see.

A canvas shirt and trowsers then they gave,
With a hop-sack frock in which I was to slave:
No shoes nor stockings had I for to wear,
Nor hat, nor cap, both head and feet were bare.
Thus dress’d into the Field I nex[t] must go,

Amongst tobacco plants all day to hoe,
At day break in the morn our work began,
And so held to the setting of the Sun.

My fellow slaves were just five Transports more,

With eighteen Negroes, which is twenty four . . .
We and the Negroes both alike did fare,

Of work and food we had an equal share.

4.  Mechanisms used to control slaves, from Thomas
Branagan, The Penitential Tyrant; or, slave trader
reformed, 1807. The shackles and spurs (lower left)
were intended to prevent escape; the faceguard
with spiked collar (top and lower right) kept its
wearer from either eating or lying down.

Source: Courtesy American Antiquarian Society.

2.  Indentured servant advertisement from the Penn-

sylvania Gazette, 1770. This advertisement offers to
sell the remainder of a servant girl’s indenture.

TO BE SOLD, A HEALTHY servant GIRL’S Time, about
17 Years old, who has between 3 and 4 years to serve. She
is sold for no other Reason, only there being more Ser-
vants than are needful in the family where she is.

N. B. She has had the Small pox, can wash, and do all

Sorts of Housework. Enquire of the Printers.

3.  Poem by James Revel, c. 1680. James Revel was an
Englishman convicted of theft and transported to
Virginia, where he served fourteen years as an in-
dentured servant. Upon returning he published

98

Source: Library of Congress.

