5.  Court deposition of Joseph Mulders, July 31, 1649.
In a court case in Lower Norfolk County, Virginia
indentured servant Joseph Mulders testiﬁed that
his mistress, Deborah Fernehaugh, brutally beat
her maidservant, Charity Dallen.

[Mulders testified] That Deborah Fernehaugh, the Mis-
tress of this deponent, did beate her mayd Sarvant in the
quartering house before the dresser more Liken a dogge
then a Christian, and that at a Certaine time, I felt her
head, which was beaten as soft as a sponge, in one place,
and that as there shee was a weeding, shee complained
and sayd, her backe bone as shee thought was broken
with beating, and that I did see the mayds arme naked
which was full of blacke and blew bruises and pinches,
and her necke Likewise and that after wards, I tould my
Mistress of it and said, that two or three blowes, could not
make her in such a Case, and after this my speeches shee
Chidge [i.e., chided] the said mayd, for shewing her body
to the men, and very often afterwards she [the maid]
would have shoen mee, how shee had been beaten, but I
refused to have seene it, saying it concernes me not, I will
doe my worke and if my Mistress abuse you; you may
complaine, and about 8 dayes since, being about the time
shee last went to Complaine, I knew of her goeing, but
would not tell my mistress of it, although shee asked mee,
and sayd I could not chuse but know of it.

6.  Runaway slave advertisement, Chestertown,

Maryland, March 12, 1755. Absconding from their
masters was a common method of resistance for
both slaves and servants, and masters frequently
posted runaway advertisements in local news-
papers.

Chestertown, Maryland, March 12, 1755. TEN PISTOLES
Reward. RAN away last night, from James Ringgold, of
Eastern Neck, in Kent county, in the province of Mary-
land, the two following servant men; one named James
Francis, an indented servant for five years, a middle siz’d
young fellow, about 26 years of age, of a smooth fair com-
plexion, his hair cut off, is an Englishman, and speaks a
little in the west country dialect; was brought up to farm-
ing and husbandry: Had on, a country kersey jacket and
breeches, blue fearnought jacket, and an old dark colour’d
coat. The other a lusty young Mulatto fellow, named Toby,
a slave about the same age, he is a well set, clean limb’d,
stout fellow neither a very bright or very dark Mulatto,
has large nostrils, is a likely fellow, and when he talks
drawls his words out in a very slow manner, is no other
way remarkable; he had on the same sort of clothes with

the other servant, and one of them has a check or striped
green and red everlasting jacket on or with them; and
perhaps the Mulatto may set up for a cooper or carpenter,
having work at both those business, and also understands
plantation affairs. Whoever takes up and secures the
above persons, and gives notice, so as their master gets
them again, shall have Four Pistoles reward for the white
servant, and Six Pistoles for the Mulatto. . . . That this
slave should runaway, and attempt getting his liberty, is
very alarming, as he has always been too kindly used, if
any thing by his master, and one in whom his master has
put great confidence, and depended on him to overlook
the rest of his slaves, and he had no kind of provocation
to go off. It seems to be the interest at least of every
gentleman that has slaves, to be active in the begin-
ning of these attempts . . . THOMAS RINGGOLD.

Sources: (2) Pennsylvania Gazette, May 3, 1770; (3) John Melville Jennings, ed., The
Virginia Magazine of History and Biography 56 (April 1948), 187–194; (5) Second to
None: A Documentary History of American Women, Vol. 1 (University of Nebraska
Press, 1993), 67–68; (6) Pennsylvania Gazette, March 12, 1755.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  What information do the traders in sources 1 and 2 want
to convey to prospective buyers, and why? What similari-
ties and differences do you see in the way sellers might
choose to market servants and slaves?

2.  What aspects of servitude did James Revel object to

(source 3)? How did he compare the experiences of ser-
vants and slaves?

3.  Source 4 appeared in an abolitionist work published in
New York in 1807. How does that fact inﬂuence your
interpretation of the images?

4.  How does Mulders grapple with his position as a fellow
servant as he testiﬁes against his mistress (source 5)?
Based on Mulders’s testimony, the court removed Dallen
from Fernehaugh’s household. How might things have
worked differently if either Mulders or Dallen had been
a slave?

5.  In source 6, what characteristics of each man does the ad
emphasize? How does Ringgold view himself as a master,
and what does his special plea to other slaveholders tell
us about slaveholding culture?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Using the sources above, along with what you learned in
class and in Chapter 3, write a short essay that compares
servitude and slavery. In what ways did African slavery in
the British colonies grow out of servitude and bear close
similarities to it, and in what ways were slaves set apart
and treated fundamentally differently than their servant
counterparts?

99

