100

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

Hulling Rice in West Africa and Georgia

Cultural practices often extend over time and space. The eighteenth-century engraving on the left shows
West African women using huge wooden mortars and pestles to strip the tough outer hull from rice kernels.
In the photo on the right, taken a century and a half later, African American women in Georgia use similar
tools to prepare rice for their families. Library of Congress. / Courtesy Georgia Vanishing Archives Collection, sap093.

brands or scars that identified them with their owners.)
But  other  tangible  markers  of  African  heritage  per-
sisted, including hairstyles, motifs used in wood carv-
ings and pottery, the large wooden mortars and pestles
used  to  hull  rice,  and  the  design  of  houses,  in which
rooms were arranged from front to back in a distinc-
tive  “I”  pattern,  not  side  by  side  as  was  common  in
English  dwellings.  Musical  instruments — especially
drums, gourd rattles, and a stringed instrument called
a  “molo,”  forerunner  to  the  banjo — helped  Africans
preserve  cultural  traditions  and,  eventually,  shape
American musical styles.

African  values  also  persisted.  Some  slaves  passed
down Muslim beliefs, and many more told their chil-
dren of the spiritual powers of conjurers, called obeah
or ifa, who knew the ways of the African gods. Enslaved
Yorubas consulted Orunmila, the god of fate, and other
Africans (a Jamaican planter noted) relied on obeah “to
revenge  injuries  and  insults,  discover  and  punish
thieves and adulterers; [and] to predict the future.”

Resistance  and Accommodation  Slaves’  freedom
of  action  was  always  dramatically  circumscribed.  It
became  illegal  to  teach  slaves  to  read  and  write,  and
most slaves owned no property of their own. Because
the institution of slavery rested on fear, planters had to
learn  a  ferocious  form  of  cruelty.  Slaves  might  be
whipped,  restrained,  or  maimed  for  any  infraction,
large or small. A female cook in a Virginia household
“was  cruelly  loaded  with  various  kinds  of  iron
machines; she had one particularly on her head, which
locked her mouth so fast that she could scarcely speak;
and  could  not  eat  nor  drink.” Thomas  Jefferson,  who
witnessed  such  punishments  on  his  father’s  Virginia
plantation,  noted  that  each  generation  of  whites  was
“nursed, educated, and daily exercised in tyranny,” and
he  concluded  that  the  relationship  “between  master
and slave is a perpetual exercise of the most unremit-
ting despotism on the one part, and degrading submis-
sion on the other.” A fellow Virginian, planter George
Mason, agreed: “Every Master is born a petty tyrant.”

