CHAPTER 3

  The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750

101

Virginian Luxuries, c. 1810

This painting by an unknown artist depicts the
brutality and sexual exploitation inherent in a slave
society. On the right, an owner chastises a male
slave by beating him with a cane; on the left, a
white master asserts his sexual prerogative with a
female slave. Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Museum,
Williamsburg, VA.

The extent of white violence often depended on the
size  and  density  of  the  slave  population.  As  Virginia
planter  William  Byrd  II  complained  of  his  slaves  in
1736, “Numbers make them insolent.” In the northern
colonies,  where  slaves  were  few,  white  violence  was
sporadic. But  plantation  owners  and  overseers  in  the
sugar-  and  rice-growing  areas,  where  Africans  out-
numbered Europeans eight or more to one, routinely
whipped  assertive  slaves.  They  also  prohibited  their
workers  from  leaving  the  plantation  without  special
passes  and  called  on  their  poor  white  neighbors  to
patrol the countryside at night.

Despite the constant threat of violence, some slaves
ran  away,  a  very  small  number  of  them  successfully.
In  some  parts  of  the  Americas — for  example,  in
Jamaica — runaway  slaves  were  able  to  form  large,
independent Maroon communities. But on the main-
land,  planters  had  the  resources  necessary  to  reclaim
runaways,  and  such  communities  were  unusual  and
precarious. More often, slaves who spoke English and
possessed artisanal skills fled to colonial towns, where
they tried to pass as free; occasionally they succeeded.
Slaves who did not run away were engaged in a con-
stant  tug-of-war  with  their  owners  over  the  terms  of
their enslavement. Some blacks bartered extra work for
better food and clothes; others seized a small privilege
and dared the master to revoke it. In this way, Sundays
gradually  became  a  day  of  rest — asserted  as  a  right,
rather  than  granted  as  a  privilege.  When  bargaining
failed,  slaves  protested  silently  by  working  slowly  or
stealing.

TRACE CHANGE OVER
TIME
How much autonomy
could slaves attain, and
what did slave owners do
to control them?

Slave  owners’  greatest  fear
was  that  their  regime  of  terror
would  fail  and  slaves  would  rise
up  to  murder  them  in  their
beds.  Occasionally  that  fear  was
realized. In the 1760s, in Amherst
County,  Virginia,  a  slave  killed
four  whites;  in  Elizabeth  City  County,  eight  slaves
strangled their master in bed. But the circumstances of
slavery made any larger-scale uprising all but impos-
sible. To rebel against their masters, slaves would have
to  be  able  to  communicate  secretly  but  effectively
across long distances; choose leaders they could trust;
formulate  and  disseminate  strategy;  accumulate  large
numbers of weapons; and ensure that no one betrayed
their plans. This was all but impossible: in plantation
slavery, the preponderance of force was on the side of
the slave owners, and blacks who chose to rise up did
so at their peril.

The  Stono  Rebellion  The largest slave uprising in
the mainland colonies, South Carolina’s Stono Rebellion
of  1739,  illustrates  the  impossibility  of  success.  The
Catholic  governor  of  Spanish  Florida  instigated  the
revolt  by  promising  freedom  to  fugitive  slaves.  By
February  1739,  at  least  69  slaves  had  escaped  to  St.
Augustine,  and  rumors  circulated  “that  a  Conspiracy
was formed by Negroes in Carolina to rise and make
their  way  out  of  the  province.”  When  war  between
England and Spain broke out in September, 75 Africans
rose in revolt and killed a number of whites near the

