102

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

Stono  River.  According  to  one  account,  some  of  the
rebels  were  Portuguese-speaking  Catholics  from  the
Kingdom  of  Kongo  who  hoped  to  escape  to  Florida.
Displaying  their  skills  as  soldiers — decades  of  brutal
slave  raiding  in  Kongo  had  militarized  the  society
there — the  rebels  marched  toward  Florida  “with
Colours displayed and two Drums beating.”

Though  their  numbers  and  organization  were
impressive, the Stono rebels were soon met by a well-
armed, mounted force of South Carolina militia. In the
ensuing battle, 44 slaves were killed and the rebellion
was  suppressed,  preventing  any  general  uprising.  In
response,  frightened  South  Carolinians  cut  slave
imports and tightened plantation discipline.

The Rise of the Southern Gentry
As  the  southern  colonies  became  full-fledged  slave
societies, life changed for whites as well as for blacks.
Consider  the  career  of  William  Byrd  II  (1674–1744).
Byrd’s father, a successful planter-merchant in Virginia,
hoped to marry his children into the English gentry. To
smooth  his  son’s  entry  into  landed  society,  Byrd  sent
him  to  England  for  his  education.  But  his  status-
conscious classmates shunned young Byrd, calling him
a “colonial,” a first bitter taste of the gradations of rank
in English society.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
How did the planter elite
maintain alliances with
their smallholder
 neighbors?

Other  English  rejections  fol-
lowed.  Lacking  aristocratic  con-
nections,  Byrd  was  denied  a
post  with  the  Board  of  Trade,
passed  over  three  times  for  the
royal  governorship  of  Virginia,
and rejected as a suitor by a rich
Englishwoman.  In  1726,  at  age  fifty-two,  Byrd  finally
gave up and moved back to Virginia, where he some-
times  felt  he  was  “being  buried  alive.”  Accepting  his
lesser destiny as a member of the colony’s elite, Byrd
built an elegant brick mansion on the family’s estate at
Westover, sat in “the best pew in the church,” and won
an appointment to the governor’s council.

William Byrd II’s experience mirrored that of many
planter-merchants,  trapped  in  Virginia  and  South
Carolina  by  their  inferior  colonial  status.  They  used
their  wealth  to  rule  over  white  yeomen  families  and
tenant  farmers  and  relied  on  violence  to  exploit
enslaved blacks. Planters used Africans to grow food,
as well as tobacco; to build houses, wagons, and tobacco
casks; and to make shoes and clothes. By making their
plantations  self-sufficient,  the  Chesapeake  elite  sur-
vived  the  depressed  tobacco  market  between  1670
and 1720.

White Identity and Equality  To prevent uprisings
like  Bacon’s  Rebellion,  the  Chesapeake  gentry  found
ways to assist middling and poor whites. They gradu-
ally lowered taxes; in Virginia, for example, the annual
head tax (on each adult man) fell from 45 pounds of
tobacco  in  1675  to  just  5  pounds  in  1750.  They  also
encouraged  smallholders  to  improve  their  economic
lot by using slave labor, and many did so. By 1770, 60
percent of English families in the Chesapeake owned at
least  one  slave.  On  the  political  front,  planters  now
allowed  poor  yeomen  and  some  tenants  to  vote.  The
strategy  of  the  leading  families — the  Carters,  Lees,
Randolphs, and Robinsons — was to bribe these voters
with rum, money, and the promise of minor offices in
county governments. In return, they expected the yeo-
men  and  tenants  to  elect  them  to  office  and  defer  to
their rule. This horse-trading solidified the authority of
the planter elite, which used its control of the House of
Burgesses  to  limit  the  power  of  the  royal  governor.
Hundreds of yeomen farmers benefitted as well, tasting
political power and garnering substantial fees and sala-
ries as deputy sheriffs, road surveyors, estate apprais-
ers, and grand jurymen.

Even  as  wealthy  Chesapeake  gentlemen  formed
political ties with smallholders, they took measures to
set  themselves  apart  culturally.  As  late  as  the  1720s,
leading planters were boisterous, aggressive men who
lived much like the common folk — hunting, drinking,
gambling  on  horse  races,  and  demonstrating  their
manly  prowess  by  forcing  themselves  on  female  ser-
vants and slaves. As time passed, however, the planters
began,  like  William  Byrd  II,  to  model  themselves  on
the English aristocracy, remaining sexual predators but
learning from advice books how to act like gentlemen
in other regards: “I must not sit in others’ places; Nor
sneeze, nor cough in people’s faces. Nor with my fin-
gers  pick  my  nose,  Nor  wipe  my  hands  upon  my
clothes.” Cultivating gentility — a refined but elaborate
lifestyle — they replaced their modest wooden houses
with mansions of brick and mortar. Planters educated
their  sons  in  London  as  lawyers  and  gentlemen.  But
unlike  Byrd’s  father,  they  expected  them  to  return  to
America,  marry  local  heiresses,  and  assume  their
fathers’  roles:  managing  plantations,  socializing  with
fellow gentry, and running the political system.

Wealthy  Chesapeake  and  South  Carolina  women
likewise emulated the English elite. They read English
newspapers and fashionable magazines, wore the finest
English  clothes,  and  dined  in  the  English  fashion,
including an elaborate afternoon tea. To enhance their
daughters’ gentility (and improve their marriage pros-
pects),  parents  hired  English  tutors.  Once  married,

