planter  women  deferred  to  their  husbands,  reared
pious  children,  and  maintained  elaborate  social  net-
works,  in  time  creating  a  new  ideal:  the  southern
gentlewoman. Using the profits generated by enslaved
Africans  in  the  South  Atlantic  System  of  commerce,
wealthy planters formed an increasingly well-educated,
refined, and stable ruling class.

The Northern Maritime
Economy
The  South  Atlantic  System  had  a  broad  geographical
reach. As early as the 1640s, New England farmers sup-
plied  the  sugar  islands  with  bread,  lumber,  fish,  and
meat. As a West Indian explained, planters “had rather
buy foode at very deare rates than produce it by labour,
soe infinite is the profitt of sugar works.” By 1700, the
economies of the West Indies and New England were
closely  interwoven.  Soon  farmers  and  merchants  in
New  York,  New  Jersey,  and  Pennsylvania  were  also
shipping wheat, corn, and bread to the Caribbean. By
the 1750s, about two-thirds of New England’s exports
and  half  of  those  from  the  Middle  Atlantic  colonies
went to the British and French sugar islands.

The sugar economy linked Britain’s entire Atlantic
empire. In return for the sugar they sent to England,
West  Indian  planters  received  credit,  in  the  form  of
bills of exchange, from London merchants. The plant-
ers used these bills to buy slaves from Africa and to pay
North American farmers and merchants for their pro-
visions and shipping services. The mainland colonists
then exchanged the bills for British manufactures, pri-
marily textiles and iron goods.

The Urban Economy
The West Indian trade created the first American mer-
chant fortunes and the first urban industries. Merchants
in  Boston,  Newport,  Providence,  Philadelphia,  and
New York invested their profits in new ships; some set
up  manufacturing  enterprises,  including  twenty-six
refineries that processed raw sugar into finished loaves.
Mainland distilleries turned West Indian molasses into
rum,  producing  more  than  2.5  million  gallons  in
Massachusetts alone by the 1770s. Merchants in Salem,
Marblehead,  and  smaller  New  England  ports  built  a
major fishing industry by selling salted mackerel and
cod to the sugar islands and to southern Europe. Balti-
more merchants transformed their town into a major

CHAPTER 3

  The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750

103

port by developing a bustling export business in wheat,
while traders in Charleston shipped deerskins, indigo,
and rice to European markets (Map 3.4).

As  transatlantic  commerce  expanded — from  five
hundred voyages a year in the 1680s to fifteen hundred
annually in the 1730s — American port cities grew in
size  and  complexity.  By  1750,  the  populations  of
Newport  and  Charleston  were  nearly  10,000;  Boston
had 15,000 residents; and New York had almost 18,000.
The largest port was Philadelphia, whose population by
1776 had reached 30,000, the size of a large European
provincial city. Smaller coastal towns emerged as cen-
ters of the lumber and shipbuilding industries. Seventy
sawmills lined the Piscataqua River in New Hampshire,
providing low-cost wood for homes, warehouses, and
especially  shipbuilding.  Hundreds  of  shipwrights
turned  out  oceangoing  vessels,  while  other  artisans
made ropes, sails, and metal fittings for the new fleet.
By the 1770s, colonial-built ships made up one-third of
the British merchant fleet.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the rise of the
South Atlantic System
impact economic develop-
ment in the northern
colonies?

The  South  Atlantic  System
extended  far  into  the  interior.  A
fleet  of  small  vessels  sailed  back
and  forth  on  the  Hudson  and
Delaware  rivers,  delivering  car-
goes  of  European  manufactures
and  picking  up  barrels  of  flour
and  wheat  to  carry  to  New  York
and Philadelphia for export to the
West  Indies  and  Europe.  By  the  1750s,  hundreds  of
professional teamsters in Maryland were transporting
370,000 bushels of wheat and corn and 16,000 barrels
of flour to urban markets each year — more than 10,000
wagon trips. To service this traffic, entrepreneurs and
artisans set up taverns, horse stables, and barrel-making
shops in towns along the wagon roads. Lancaster (the
town that hosted the Iroquois conference described in
the chapter opening), in a prosperous wheat-growing
area of Pennsylvania, boasted more than 200 German
and English artisans and a dozen merchants.

Urban Society
Wealthy merchants dominated the social life of seaport
cities.  In  1750,  about  40  merchants  controlled  more
than  50  percent  of  Philadelphia’s  trade.  Like  the
Chesapeake  gentry,  urban  merchants  imitated  the
British  upper  classes,  importing  architectural  design
books from England and building Georgian-style man-
sions  to  display  their  wealth.  Their  wives  strove  to
create  a  genteel  culture  by  buying  fine  furniture  and
entertaining guests at elegant dinners.

