104

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

With the map title in mind, look carefully at the
two types of transoceanic trade: one controlled by
British ships and the other open to colonial vessels.
The latter soon dominated this ocean commerce.

The bold, colorful arrows on this map give it a dynamic
quality that reflects the nature of the Atlantic trade.
But the title suggests we should look for something
particular: the rise of the American merchant.

W

N

S

E

tobacco,indigo,flour,lumber

Glasgow

(cid:4)
GREAT
BRITAIN

(cid:4)(cid:4)

London

Bristol

molasses, sugar

PORTUGAL

(cid:4)

Lisbon

fish

rice

EUROPE

FRANCE

Madrid

(cid:4)
SPAIN
Cadiz

(cid:4)

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

,

r
u
m
m
a
n
u
f
a
c
t
u
r
e
d
g
o
o
ds

rum

Think of the bold, straight arrows as
a diagram rather than as routes that
are accurate in a geographical sense.
The width of the arrows suggests the
relative importance of each leg. Compare
this diagram-type map with the accurately
scaled widths of the arrows on Map 3.3.

AFRICA

James Fort

(cid:4)

Boston
(cid:4)
Newport
(cid:4)
(cid:4)

New York
(cid:4)
Philadelphia
(cid:4)(cid:4)
Baltimore
Chesapeake
ports

NORTH
AMERICA

Charleston
(cid:4)

Savannah

(cid:4)

flour, lumber, fish,
molasses, sugar,
manufactures,
bills of exchange

WEST
           INDIES

NEW
       SPAIN

manufacturedgoods

salt, wine, bills of exchange

slaves

manufactured goods, bills of exchange

slaves

British-controlled trade
American-controlled trade

0

0

500

1,000 miles

500

1,000 kilometers

Sierra Leone

(cid:4)

Cape Coast
Castle

Lagos

(cid:4)(cid:4) (cid:4)
Accra

MAP 3.4
The Growing Power of American Merchants, 1750

Throughout the colonial era, British merchant houses dominated the transatlantic trade in
manufactures, sugar, tobacco, and slaves. However, by 1750, American-born merchants in Boston,
New York, and Philadelphia had seized control of the commerce between the mainland and the
West Indies. In addition, Newport traders played a small role in the slave trade from Africa, and
Boston and Charleston merchants grew rich carrying ﬁsh and rice to southern Europe.

Artisan and shopkeeper families, the middle ranks
of seaport society, made up nearly half the population.
Innkeepers, butchers, seamstresses, shoemakers, weav-
ers,  bakers,  carpenters,  masons,  and  dozens  of  other
skilled  workers  toiled  to  gain  an  income  sufficient  to
maintain their families in modest comfort. Wives and
husbands often worked as a team and taught the “mys-
teries  of  the  craft”  to  their  children.  Some  artisans
aspired to wealth and status, an entrepreneurial ethic
that  prompted  them  to  hire  apprentices  and  expand
production. However, most artisans were not well-to-
do. During his working life, a tailor was lucky to accu-
mulate £30 worth of property, far less than the £2,000
owned at death by an ordinary merchant or the £300
listed  in  the  probate  inventory  of  a  successful
blacksmith.

Laboring men and women formed the lowest ranks
of urban society. Merchants needed hundreds of dock-
workers to unload manufactured goods and molasses
from  inbound  ships  and  reload  them  with  barrels  of
wheat, fish, and rice. For these demanding jobs, mer-
chants used enslaved blacks and indentured servants,
who together made up 30 percent of the workforce in
Philadelphia and New York City until the 1750s; other-
wise,  they  hired  unskilled  wageworkers.  Poor  white
and black women eked out a living by washing clothes,
spinning  wool,  or  working  as  servants  or  prostitutes.
To make ends meet, laboring families sent their chil-
dren out to work.

Periods  of  stagnant  commerce  threatened  the
financial  security  of  merchants  and  artisans  alike.
laborers,  seamen,  and  seamstresses — whose
For

