CHAPTER 3

  The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750

105

The Greenwood-Lee Family, 1747

Born in Massachusetts and apprenticed as
an engraver, John Greenwood (1727–1792)
painted dozens of commissioned works
there before moving to Surinam in 1752. He
painted this scene of his own family at the
age of twenty. Group portraits with so
many people were rare in the colonies, and
it is a technically impressive composition.
Greenwood himself is at the right rear,
wigless (he wears a velvet cap to keep his
head warm) and holding a palette and
brushes. The table displays a basket of
needlework and a volume of The Spectator,
the popular London periodical published by
Joseph Addison and Richard Steele.
Photograph © 2014 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.
Bequest of Henry Lee Shattuck in memory of the
late Morris Gray, 1983.34.

household  budgets  left  no  margin  for  sickness  or
trade  meant  hunger,
unemployment — depressed
dependence on public charity, and (for the most des-
perate) petty thievery or prostitution. The sugar- and
slave-based South Atlantic System, and cycles of impe-
rial warfare, brought economic uncertainty as well as
opportunity to the people of the northern colonies.

New Jersey, and Pennsylvania did the same. Using such
tactics, the legislatures gradually took control of taxa-
tion and appointments, angering imperial bureaucrats
and  absentee  proprietors.  “The  people  in  power  in
Amer ica,” complained William Penn during a struggle
with the Pennsylvania assembly, “think nothing taller
than themselves but the Trees.”

The New Politics of Empire,
1713–1750
The South Atlantic System also changed the politics of
empire. British ministers, pleased with the wealth pro-
duced by the trade in slaves, sugar, rice, and tobacco,
ruled  the  colonies  with  a  gentle  hand.  The  colonists
took  advantage  of  that  leniency  to  strengthen  their
 political  institutions  and  eventually  to  challenge  the
rules of the mercantilist system.

The Rise of Colonial Assemblies
After  the  Glorious  Revolution,  representative  assem-
blies in America copied the English Whigs and limited
the powers of crown officials. In Massachusetts during
the 1720s, the assembly repeatedly ignored the king’s
instructions  to  provide  the  royal  governor  with  a
 permanent salary, and legislatures in North Carolina,

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What explains the increas-
ing political autonomy of
the colonies in the eigh-
teenth century?

Leading

increasingly
the
powerful  assemblies  were  mem-
bers of the colonial elite. Although
most property- owning white men
had  the  right  to  vote,  only  men
of  wealth  and  status  stood  for
election.  In  New  Jersey  in  1750,
90 percent of assemblymen came from influential polit-
ical families (Figure 3.3). In Virginia, seven members
of the wealthy Lee family sat in the House of Burgesses
and, along with other powerful families, domi  nated its
major  committees.  In  New  England,  affluent  descen-
dants of the original Puritans formed a core of political
leaders. “Go into every village in New England,” John
Adams wrote in 1765, “and you will find that the office
of justice of the peace, and even the place of represen-
tative,  have  generally  descended  from  generation  to
generation, in three or four families at most.”

However,  neither  elitist  assemblies  nor  wealthy
property owners could impose unpopular edicts on the
people. Purposeful crowd actions were a fact of colo-
nial life. An uprising of ordinary citizens overthrew the

