106

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

Number of relatives
per assemblyman:

None

7+
3–6
1–2

100%

80

60

40

20

0

1703

1710

1720

1730

1740

1750

1760

1770

1776

FIGURE 3.3
Family Connections and Political Power, New Jersey,
1700–1776

As early as 1700, more than 50 percent of the members
of the New Jersey assembly came from families with
a history of political leadership. By 1750, the percent-
age whose fathers or other relatives had served in the
assembly reached 90 percent; indeed, some members
had seven relatives who were (or had been) political
leaders, clear testimony of the emergence of power-
ful political famil   ies and an experienced governing elite.
However, as the conﬂict with Britain increased after
1765, voters in New Jersey and elsewhere ousted luke-
warm patriots, and new families entered the political
ranks.

Dominion  of  New  England  in  1689.  In  New  York,
in  Salem,
mobs  closed  houses  of  prostitution;
Massachusetts, they ran people with infectious diseases
out of town; and in New Jersey in the 1730s and 1740s,
mobs  of  farmers  battled  with  proprietors  who  were
forcing  tenants  off  disputed  lands.  When  officials  in
Boston restricted the sale of farm produce to a single
public market, a crowd destroyed the building, and its
members defied the authorities to arrest them. “If you
touch  One  you  shall  touch  All,”  an  anonymous  letter
warned the sheriff, “and we will show you a Hundred
Men  where  you  can  show  one.”  These  expressions  of
popular  discontent,  combined  with  the  growing
authority of the assemblies, created a political system
that  was  broadly  responsive  to  popular  pressure  and
increasingly resistant to British control.

Salutary Neglect
British colonial policy during the reigns of George I (r.
1714–1727) and George II (r. 1727–1760) allowed for
this rise of American self-government as royal bureau-
crats,  pleased  by  growing  trade  and  import  duties,
relaxed their supervision of internal colonial affairs. In
1775,  British  political  philosopher  Edmund  Burke
would praise this strategy as salutary neglect.

Salutary  neglect  was  a  by-product  of  the  political
system  developed  by  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  the  Whig
leader in the House of Commons from 1720 to 1742.
By providing supporters with appointments and pen-
sions, Walpole won parliamentary approval for his pol-
icies.  However,  his  patronage  appointments  filled  the
British government, including the Board of Trade and
the  colonial  bureaucracy,  with  do-nothing  political
hacks.  When  Governor  Gabriel  Johnson  arrived  in
North  Carolina  in  the  1730s,  he  vowed  to  curb  the
powers of the assembly and “make a mighty change in
the  face  of  affairs.”  Receiving  little  support  from  the
Board of Trade, Johnson renounced reform and decided
“to do nothing which can be reasonably blamed, and
leave the rest to time, and a new set of inhabitants.”

Walpole’s  tactics  also  weakened  the  empire  by
undermining  the  legitimacy  of  the  political  system.
Radical Whigs protested that Walpole had betrayed the
Glorious  Revolution  by  using  patronage — the  prac-
tice of giving offices and salaries to political allies — and
bribery to create a strong Court (or Kingly) Party. The
Country  Party,  whose  members  were  landed  gentle-
men,  likewise  warned  that  Walpole’s  policies  of  high
taxes  and  a  bloated  royal  bureaucracy  threatened
British  liberties.  Heeding  these  arguments,  colonial
legislators  complained  that  royal  governors  abused
their patronage powers. To preserve American liberty,
the colonists strengthened the powers of the represen-
tative  assemblies,  unintentionally  laying  the  founda-
tion  for  the  American  independence  movement
(American Voices, p. 108).

Protecting the Mercantile System
In 1732, Walpole provided a parliamentary subsidy for
the  new  colony  of  Georgia.  While  Georgia’s  reform-
minded trustees envisioned the colony as a refuge for
Britain’s  poor,  Walpole  had  little  interest  in  social
reform; he subsidized Georgia to protect the valuable
rice-growing  colony  of  South  Carolina.  The  subsidy,
however, did exactly the opposite. Britain’s expansion
into  Georgia  outraged  Spanish  officials,  who  were

