CHAPTER 3

  The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750

107

Succession  (1740–1748).  Massive  French  armies
battled  British-subsidized  German  forces  in  Europe,
and French naval forces roamed the West Indies, vainly
trying  to  conquer  a  British  sugar  island.  Three  thou-
sand New England militiamen, supported by a British
naval  squadron,  in  1745  captured  Louisbourg,  the
French fort guarding the entrance to the St. Lawrence
River.  To  the  dismay  of  New  England  Puritans,  who
feared  invasion  from  Catholic  Quebec,  the  Treaty  of
Aix-la-Chapelle (1748) returned Louisbourg to France.
The treaty made it clear to colonial leaders that England
would act in its own interests, not theirs.

Mercantilism and the
American Colonies
Though Parliament prohibited Americans from manu-
facturing  textiles  (Woolen  Act,  1699),  hats  (Hat  Act,
1732), and iron products such as plows, axes, and skil-
lets (Iron Act, 1750), it could not prevent the colonies
from  maturing  economically.  American  merchants
soon  controlled  over  75  percent  of  the  transatlantic
trade in manufactures and 95 percent of the commerce
between the mainland and the British West Indies (see
Map 3.4, p. 104).

Moreover,  by  the  1720s,  the  British  sugar  islands
could not absorb all the flour, fish, and meat produced
by  mainland  settlers.  So,  ignoring  Britain’s  intense
rivalry with France, colonial merchants sold their pro-
duce to the French sugar islands. When American rum
distillers began to buy cheap molasses from the French
islands,  the  West  Indian  sugar  lobby  in  London  per-
suaded  Parliament  to  pass  the  Molasses  Act  of  1733.
The act placed a high tariff on French molasses, so high
that it would no longer be profitable for American mer-
chants  to  import  it.  Colonists  protested  that  the
Molasses Act would cripple the distilling industry; cut
farm exports; and, by slashing colonial income, reduce
the  mainland’s  purchases  of  British  goods.  When
Parliament  ignored  these  arguments,  American  mer-
chants  smuggled  in  French  molasses  by  bribing  cus-
toms officials.

The  lack  of  currency  in  the  colonies  prompted
another conflict with British officials. To pay for British
manufactures,  American  merchants  used  the  bills  of
exchange and the gold and silver coins earned in the
West Indian trade. These payments drained the colonial
economy of money, making it difficult for Americans
to borrow funds or to buy and sell goods among them-
selves. To remedy the problem, ten colonial assemblies
established public land banks, which lent paper money

Sir Robert Walpole, the King’s Minister

All eyes are on the secretary of the Treasury, Sir Robert
Walpole (left), as he offers advice to the Speaker of the House
of Commons. A brilliant politician, Walpole used patronage
to command a majority in the Commons and also won the
conﬁdence of George I and George II, the German-speaking
monarchs from the duchy of Hanover. Walpole’s personal
motto, “Let sleeping dogs lie,” helps explain his colonial
policy of salutary neglect. Clandon Park, Surrey, UK/National Trust
Photographic Library/Hawksley Studios/The Bridgeman Art Library.

already angry about the rising tide of smuggled Brit-
ish  manufactures  in  New  Spain.  To  counter  Britain’s
 commercial imperialism, Spanish naval forces stepped
up their seizure of illegal traders, in the process muti-
lating an English sea captain, Robert Jenkins.

Yielding

to  parliamentary  pressure,  Walpole
declared  war  on  Spain in  1739. The  so-called  War  of
Jenkins’s Ear (1739–1741) was a fiasco for Britain. In
1740,  British  regulars  failed  to  capture  St.  Augustine
because  South  Carolina  whites,  still  shaken  by  the
Stono Rebellion, refused to commit militia units to the
expedition. A year later, an assault on the prosperous
seaport  of  Cartagena  (in  present-day  Colombia)  also
failed;  20,000  British  sailors  and  soldiers  and  2,500
colonial troops died in the attack, mostly from tropical
diseases.

The War of Jenkins’s Ear quickly became part of a
general  European  conflict,  the  War  of  the  Austrian

