A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

The Rise of Colonial

Self-Government

Between  1700  and  1760,  members  of  the  representative  assemblies  in  British
North America gradually expanded their authority and power. Their success was
the  result  of  greater  popular  participation  in  politics  and  their  own  political
skills. However, the shift in power from imperial appointees to colonial legisla-
tors  occurred  in  a  piecemeal  fashion,  as  the  almost  unconscious  product  of  a
series of small, seemingly inconsequential struggles. As you read the following
correspondence among legislators, governors, and British ofﬁcials, look closely
at the character of the disputes and how they were resolved.

Alexander Spotswood
Confronting the House of Burgesses

As a reward for his military service ﬁghting the forces of
Louis XIV of France, Alexander Spotswood became gover-
nor of Virginia in 1710. A contentious man, Spotswood was
a controversial governor. He told the House of Burgesses
to its face that the voters had mistakenly chosen “a set of
representatives whom heaven has not generally endowed
with the ordinary [intellectual or social] qualiﬁcations req-
uisite to legislators.” Spotswood set out to reform the vot-
ing system that, in his judgment, produced such mediocre
representatives.  His  efforts  to  oust  popular  members  of
the  gentry  from  the  House  of  Burgesses  created  few
friends;  in  1722,  his  enemies  in  Virginia  used  their  inﬂu-
ence in London to have him removed from ofﬁce.

To ye Council of Trade, Virginia, October 15, 1712
MY LORDS:

. . . The Indians continue their Incursions in North
Carolina, and the Death of Colo. Hyde, their Gov’r, which
happened the beginning of last Month, increases the mis-
ery of that province. . . .

This Unhappy State of her Maj’t’s Subjects in my

Neighbourhood is ye more Affecting to me because I have
very little hopes of being enabled to relieve them by our
Assembly, which I have called to meet next Week; for the
Mob of this Country, having tried their Strength in the
late Election and finding themselves able to carry whom
they please, have generally chosen representatives of their
own Class, who as their principal Recommendation have
declared their resolution to raise no Tax on the people, let
the occasion be what it will. This is owing to a defect in
the Constitution, which allows to every one, tho’ but just
out of the Condition of a Servant, and that can but pur-
chase half an acre of Land, an equal Vote with the Man of
the best Estate in the Country.

The Militia of this Colony is perfectly useless without
Arms or ammunition, and by an unaccountable infatua-
tion, no arguments I have used can prevail on these

108

 people to make their Militia more Serviceable, or to fall
into any other measures for the Defence of their Country.
[From the Journal of the Virginia Council]
December the 17th, 1714

The Governor this day laying before the Council a let-
ter from the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners
for Trade dated the 23d of April 1713 directing him to
advise with the Council & to recommend to the Generall
Assembly to pass a law for qualifying the Electors & the
persons Elected Burgesses to serve in the Generall
Assembly of this Colony in a more just & equal manner
than the Laws now in force do direct. . . . The Council
declare that they cannot advise the Governor to move
for any alteration in the present method of Electing of
Burgesses, some being of opinion that this is not a proper
time, & others that the present manner of electing of
Burgesses & the qualifications of the elected is sufficiently
provided for by the Laws now in force.
To Mr. Secretary James Stanhope, July 15, 1715

. . . I cannot forbear regretting yt I must always have

to do with ye Representatives of ye Vulgar People, and
mostly with such members as are of their Stamp and
Understanding, for so long as half an Acre of Land (which
is of small value in this Country) qualifys a man to be an
Elector, the meaner sort of People will ever carry ye
Elections, and the humour generally runs to choose such
men as are their most familiar Companions, who very
eagerly seek to be Burgesses merely for the lucre of the
Salary, and who, for fear of not being chosen again, dare
in Assembly do nothing that may be disrelished [disap-
proved] out of the House by ye Common People. Hence it
often happens yt what appears prudent and feasible to his
Majesty’s Governors and Council here will not pass with
the House of Burgesses, upon whom they must depend for
the means of putting their designs in Execution.
To the Lords Commissioners of Trade, May 23, 1716

. . . The behaviour of this Gentleman [Philip Ludwell
Jr., the colony’s Auditor] in constantly opposing whatever
I have offered for ye due collecting the Quitt rents [annual

