feudal dues on land] and regulating the Acc’ts; his stirring
up ye humours of the people before the last election of
Burgesses; tampering with the most mutinous of that
house, and betraying to them the measures resolved on in
Council for his Majesty’s Service, would have made me
likewise suspend him from ye Council, but I find by the
late Instructions I have received from his Majesty that
Power is taken from ye Governor and transferred upon the
majority of that Board [of Councilors], and while there are
no less than seven of his Relations there, it is impossible to
get a Majority to consent to the Suspension of him.

Sources: R. A. Brock, ed., The Official Letters of Alexander Spotswood (Richmond:
Virginia Historical Society, 1885), 2: 1–2, 124, 154–155; H. R. MacIlwaine, ed.,
Executive Journals of the Council of Colonial Virginia (Richmond: Virginia State
Library, 1928), 3: 392.

George Clinton
A Plea for Assistance

George Clinton served as governor of New York from 1744
to  1752.  Like  many  governors  during  the  era  of  salutary
neglect, Clinton owed his appointment to political connec-
tions in England. As the second son of the seventh Earl of
Lincoln, he would inherit neither the family’s estate nor his
father’s position in the House of Lords; those went to his
elder brother. To provide an income for Clinton, his family
traded its votes in Parliament for patronage appointments.
However,  once  Clinton  was  installed  as  governor  of  New
York, he found himself dependent on the assembly for the
payment of his salary — and the salaries of all members of
his administration.

My Lords,

I have in my former letters inform’d Your Lordships
what Incroachments the Assemblys of this province have
from time to time made on His Majesty’s Prerogative &
Authority in this Province in drawing an absolute depen-
dence of all the Officers upon them for their Saleries &
Reward of their services, & by their taking in effect the
Nomination to all Officers. . . .

1stly, That the Assembly refuse to admit of any
amendment to any money bill, in any part of the Bill; so

that the Bill must pass as it comes from the Assembly, or
all the Supplies granted for the support of Government, &
the most urgent services must be lost.

2ndly, It appears that they take the Payment of the
[military] Forces, passing of Muster Rolls into their own
hands by naming the Commissaries for those purposes in
the Act.

3rdly, They by granting the Saleries to the Officers

personally by name & not to the Officer for the time
being, intimate that if any person be appointed to any
Office his Salery must depend upon their approbation of
the Appointment. . . .

I must now refer it to Your Lordships’ consideration
whether it be not high time to put a stop to these usurpa-
tions of the Assembly on His Majesty’s Authority in this
Province and for that purpose may it not be proper that
His Majesty signify his Disallowance of the Act at least for
the payment of Saleries.

Source: E. B. O’Callaghan, ed., Documents Relative to the Colonial History of the State of
New York (Albany, 1860 on), 2: 211.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  What policies does Spotswood wish to pursue? Why

can’t he persuade the House of Burgesses to implement
them? According to Spotswood, what is wrong with
Virginia’s political system? How does he propose to
reform it?

2.  Unlike the House of Burgesses, which was elected by

qualiﬁed voters, the members of the Governor’s Council
in Virginia were appointed by the king, usually on
the governor’s recommendation. What is the council’s
response to the plan to reform the political system?
Given Spotswood’s description of the incident involving
Philip Ludwell, where did the political sympathies of the
council lie?

3.  What were Clinton’s complaints about the actions of
the New York assembly? Did these actions represent
a more or less serious threat to imperial power than
the activities of the Virginia Burgesses? Based on
their correspondence with the Board of Trade, which
governor — Spotswood or Clinton — was the stronger
representative of the interests of the crown?

109

