110

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

The Siege and Capture of
Louisbourg, 1745

In 1760, as British and colonial
troops moved toward victory in
the French and Indian War (1754–
1763), the London artist J. Stevens
sought to bolster imperial pride
by celebrating an earlier Anglo-
American triumph. In 1745, a
British naval squadron led a ﬂotilla
of colonial ships and thousands
of New England militiamen in
an attack on the French fort at
Louisbourg, on Cape Breton
Island, near the mouth of the St.
Lawrence River. After a siege of
forty days, the Anglo-American
force captured the fort, long
considered impregnable. The
victory was bittersweet because
the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle
(1748) returned the island to
France. Anne S. K. Brown Military
Collection, Brown University Library.

to farmers who pledged their land as collateral for the
loans. Farmers used the currency to buy tools or live-
stock  or  to  pay  creditors,  thereby  stimulating  trade.
However, some assemblies, particularly the legislature
in Rhode Island, issued huge quantities of paper money
(which consequently decreased in value) and required
merchants  to  accept  it  as  legal  tender.  English  mer-
chants  and  other  creditors  rightly  complained  about
being  forced  to  accept  devalued  money.  So  in  1751,
Parliament passed the Currency Act, which barred the
New  England  colonies  from  establishing  new  land
banks and prohibited the use of publicly issued paper
money to pay private debts.

These conflicts over trade and paper money angered
a new generation of English political leaders. In 1749,
Charles Townshend of the Board of Trade charged that
the  American  assemblies  had  assumed  many  of  the
“ancient and established prerogatives wisely preserved
in the Crown,” and he vowed to replace salutary neglect
with more rigorous imperial control.

The  wheel  of  empire  had  come  full  circle.  In  the
1650s, England had set out to create a centrally man-
aged Atlantic empire and, over the course of a century,
achieved  the  military  and  economic  aspects  of  that
goal.  Mercantilist  legislation,  maritime  warfare,  com-
mercial  expansion,  and  the  forced  labor  of  a  million
African slaves brought prosperity to Britain. However,
internal unrest (the Glorious Revolution) and a policy
of  salutary  neglect  had  weakened  Britain’s  political

authority over its American colonies. Recognizing the
threat  self-government  posed  to  the  empire,  British
officials in the late 1740s vowed to reassert their power
in America — an initiative with disastrous results.

SUMMARY
In  this  chapter,  we  examined  processes  of  change  in
politics  and  society.  The  political  story  began  in  the
1660s  as  Britain  imposed  controls  on  its  American
possessions. Parliament passed the Acts of Trade and
Navigation  to  keep  colonial  products  and  trade  in
 English  hands.  Then  King  James  II  abolished  repre-
sentative institutions in the northern colonies and cre-
ated  the  authoritarian  Dominion  of  New  England.
Following  the  Glorious  Revolution,  the  Navigation
Acts remained in place and tied the American econ-
omy to that of Britain. But the uprisings of 1688–1689
overturned James II’s policy of strict imperial control,
restored  colonial  self-government,  and  ushered  in
an  era  of  salutary  political  neglect.  It  also  initiated
a  long  era  of  imperial  warfare,  in  which  Native
American  peoples  allied  themselves  to  the  colonies
and  often  served  as  proxy  warriors  against  French-
and Spanish-allied peoples, pursuing their own goals
in the process.

The social story centers on the development of the
South Atlantic System of production and trade, which

