CHAPTER 3

  CHAPTER REVIEW

111

involved an enormous expansion in African slave raid-
ing;  the  Atlantic  slave  trade;  and  the  cultivation  of
sugar,  rice,  and  tobacco  in  America.  This  complex
system  created  an  exploited  African  American  labor
force in the southern mainland and West Indian colo-
nies,  while  it  allowed  European  American  farmers,

merchants, and artisans on the North American main-
land to prosper. How would the two stories play out? In
1750,  slavery  and  the  South  Atlantic  System  seemed
firmly  entrenched,  but  the  days  of  salutary  neglect
appeared numbered.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

proprietorship   (p. 82)
Quakers   (p. 82)
Navigation Acts   (p. 83)
Dominion of New England

(p. 85)

Glorious Revolution   (p. 86)
constitutional monarchy   (p. 87)
Second Hundred Years’ War

(p. 88)

tribalization   (p. 88)
Covenant Chain   (p. 89)
South Atlantic System   (p. 90)
Middle Passage   (p. 94)
Stono Rebellion   (p. 101)
gentility   (p. 102)
salutary neglect   (p. 106)
patronage   (p. 106)
land banks   (p. 110)

Key People

William Penn   (p. 82)
Edmund Andros   (p. 85)
William of Orange   (p. 86)
John Locke   (p. 86)
Jacob Leisler   (p. 87)
William Byrd II   (p. 102)
Robert Walpole   (p. 106)

REVIEW QUESTIONS  Answer these questions to demonstrate your

understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  What strategies did Charles II and James II employ
to  try  to  gain  more  centralized  control  over
England’s  American  colonies?  What  did  James
hope  to  accomplish  by  creating  the  Dominion  of
New England?

2.  How did the long era of imperial warfare beginning
in 1689 affect the colonies, Native Americans, and
relations between them?

3.  What was the South Atlantic System, and how did

it shape colonial society?

4.  How did the institution of slavery develop, and why
did  it  develop  differently  in  the  Chesapeake,  the
Carolina low country, and the West Indies?

5.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Trace

the
developments  outlined  in  the  section  entitled
“Politics and Power” from 1660 to 1750 on the the-
matic timeline on page 79. What pattern of political
evolution do you see in colonial interactions with
Britain?

