112

PART 2

  CHAPTER REVIEW

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS TIME AND PLACE  In Chapter 2, we
traced  the  emergence  of  three  distinct  colonial
types in the Americas during the sixteenth and sev-
enteenth  centuries:  tribute,  plantation,  and  neo-
European colonies. In Chapter 3, we have seen how
Britain’s  plantation  and  neo-European  colonies
became  more  closely  interconnected  after  1700.
What developments caused them to become more
closely  tied  to  each  other?  How  did  they  benefit
from these ties? Can you see any disadvantages to
the  colonies  in  a  more  fully  integrated  Atlantic
system?

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  Consider the illustrations
of women hulling rice in West Africa and Georgia
on page 100. Historians have long debated the role
Africans  played  in  developing  rice  cultivation  in
the South Carolina and Georgia low country. These
debates have focused primarily on methods of cul-
tivation:  Did  Africans  who  had  prior  experience
with  rice  teach  English  planters  how  to  grow  it?
How can these two images contribute to the debate
and  expand  our  perspective  on  the  question  of
African influences in American rice production?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Ira Berlin, Many Thousands Gone (2000). Explores the
varieties of slave experience in North America.

Olaudah Equiano, The Interesting Narrative of the Life
of Olaudah Equiano (1789; reprint 2006). A compel-
ling and influential eighteenth-century slave autobiog-
raphy.

Paul Mapp, The Elusive West and the Contest for
Empire, 1713–1763 (2011). Offers a continental
perspective on the contest for European control of
North America.

Owen Stanwood, The Empire Reformed (2011). Tells
the story of the Glorious Revolution in the American
colonies.

Africans in America, Part 1: Terrible Transformation,
1450–1750 (PBS video, 1998) and the related Web site
(pbs.org/wgbh/aia/part1/title.html). Treats the early
African American experience.

“The Atlantic Slave Trade and Slave Life in the
Americas: A Visual Record” (hitchcock.itc.virginia
.edu/Slavery). An extensive collection of slave images.

