Growth, Diversity, and Conflict
1720–1763

In 1736, Alexander MacAllister left the

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
In  what  ways  were  Britain’s  Ameri-
can  colonies  affected  by  events
across  the  Atlantic,  and  how  were
their  societies  taking  on  a  life  of
their own?

Highlands  of  Scotland  for  the  back-
country  of  North  Carolina,  where  his
wife  and  three  sisters  soon  joined  him.
MacAllister prospered as a landowner and
mill proprietor and had only praise for his
new  home.  Carolina  was  “the  best  poor
man’s  country,”  he  wrote  to  his  brother  Hector,  urging  him  to  “advise  all  poor
people . . . to  take  courage  and  come.”  In  North  Carolina,  there  were  no  landlords
to  keep  “the  face  of  the  poor . . . to  the  grinding  stone,”  and  so  many  Highlanders
were arriving that “it will soon be a new Scotland.” Here, on the far margins of the
British Empire, people could “breathe the air of liberty, and not want the necessarys of
life.”  Some  300,000  European  migrants — primarily  Highland  Scots,  Scots-Irish,  and
Germans — heeded  MacAllister’s  advice  and  helped  swell  the  population  of  Britain’s
North American settlements from 400,000 in 1720 to almost 2 million by 1765.

MacAllister’s “air of liberty” did not last forever, as the rapid increase in white set-
tlers and the arrival of nearly 300,000 enslaved Africans transformed life throughout
mainland  British  North  America.  Long-settled  towns  in  New  England  became  over-
crowded, and antagonistic ethnic and religious communities jostled uneasily with one
another in the Middle Atlantic colonies; in 1748, there were more than a hundred Ger-
man Lutheran and Reformed congregations in Quaker-led Pennsylvania. By then, the
MacAllisters and thousands of other Celtic and German migrants had altered the social
landscape and introduced religious conﬂict into the southern backcountry.

Everywhere,  two  European  cultural  movements,  the  Enlightenment  and  Pietism,
changed  the  tone  of  intellectual  and  spiritual  life.  Advocates  of  “rational  thought”
viewed human beings as agents of moral self-determination and urged Americans to
fashion a better social order. Religious Pietists outnumbered them and had more inﬂu-
ence. Convinced of the weakness of human nature, evangelical ministers told their fol-
lowers to seek regeneration through divine grace. Amidst this intellectual and religious
ferment, migrants and the landless children of long-settled families moved inland and
sparked  wars  with  the  native  peoples  and  with  France  and  Spain.  A  generation  of
dynamic growth produced a decade of deadly warfare that would set the stage for a
new era in American history.

4

C H A P T E R

NEW ENGLAND’S
FREEHOLD SOCIETY

Farm Families: Women in the

Household Economy

Farm Property: Inheritance

Freehold Society in Crisis

DIVERSITY IN THE
MIDDLE COLONIES

Economic Growth, Opportunity,

and Conflict

Cultural Diversity

Religion and Politics

COMMERCE, CULTURE,
AND IDENTITY

Transportation and the Print

Revolution

The Enlightenment in America

American Pietism and the Great

Awakening

Religious Upheaval in the North

Social and Religious Conflict in

the South

THE MIDCENTURY
CHALLENGE: WAR,
TRADE, AND SOCIAL
CONFLICT, 1750–1765
The French and Indian War

The Great War for Empire

British Industrial Growth and the

Consumer Revolution

The Struggle for Land in the East

Western Rebels and Regulators

114

