116

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

New England’s
Freehold Society
In the 1630s, the Puritans had fled England, where a
small elite of nobles and gentry owned 75  percent of
the arable land, while tenants (renters) and property-
less workers farmed it. In New England, the Puritans
created a yeoman society of relatively equal landown-
ing farm families. But by 1750, the migrants’ numerous
descendants had parceled out the best farmland, threat-
ening the future of the freehold ideal.

Farm Families: Women in the
Household Economy
The Puritans’ vision of social equality did not extend to
women, and their ideology placed the husband firmly
at  the  head  of  the  household.  In  The  Well-Ordered
Family (1712), the Reverend Benjamin Wadsworth of
Boston advised women, “Since he is thy Husband, God
has made him the head and set him above thee.” It was
a wife’s duty “to love and reverence” her husband.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
What ideas, institu-
tions, and responsibilities
shaped New England farm
women’s lives?

Women learned this subordi-
nate  role  throughout  their  lives.
Small girls watched their mothers
defer  to  their  fathers,  and  as
young  women,  they  were  told  to
be “silent in company.” They saw
the courts prosecute more women
than men for the crime of fornica-
tion  (sex  outside  of  marriage),  and  they  found  that
their marriage portions would be inferior to those of

their brothers. Thus Ebenezer Chittendon of Guilford,
Connecticut,  left  his  land  to  his  sons,  decreeing  that
“Each Daughter [shall] have half so much as Each Son,
one half in money and the other half in Cattle.”

Throughout the colonies, women assumed the role
of  dutiful  helpmeets  (helpmates)  to  their  husbands.
In addition to tending gardens, farmwives spun thread
and  yarn  from  flax  and  wool  and  then  wove  it  into
cloth for shirts and gowns. They knitted sweaters and
stockings,  made  candles  and  soap,  churned  milk  into
butter, fermented malt for beer, preserved meats, and
mastered  dozens  of  other  household  tasks.  “Notable
women” — those  who  excelled  at  domestic  arts —
won praise and high status (Thinking Like a Historian,
p. 118).

Bearing and rearing children were equally impor-
tant  tasks.  Most  women  in  New  England  married  in
their early twenties and by their early forties had given
birth to six or seven children, delivered with the help of
a  female  neighbor  or  a  midwife.  One  Massachusetts
mother confessed that she had little time for religious
activities  because  “the  care  of  my  Babes  takes  up  so
large  a  portion  of  my  time  and  attention.”  Yet  most
Puritan  congregations  were  filled  with  women:  “In  a
Church of between Three and Four Hundred Commun-
icants,”  the  eminent  minister  Cotton  Mather  noted,
“there are but few more than One Hundred Men; all the
Rest are Women.”

Women’s  lives  remained  tightly  bound  by  a  web
of  legal  and  cultural  restrictions.  Ministers  praised
women  for  their  piety  but  excluded  them  from  an
equal  role  in  the  church.  When  Hannah  Heaton,  a
Connecticut  farmwife,  grew  dissatisfied  with  her

Prudence Punderson (1758–1784), The First,
Second and Last Scenes of Mortality

This powerful image reveals both the artistic skills
of colonial women in the traditional medium of
needlework and the Puritans’ continuing cultural
concern with the inevitability of death. Prudence
Punderson, the Connecticut woman who embroi-
dered this scene, rejected a marriage proposal and
followed her Loyalist father into exile on Long Island
in 1778. Sometime later, she married a cousin,
Timothy Rossiter, and bore a daughter, Sophia, who
may well be the baby in the cradle being rocked by
“Jenny,” a slave owned by Prudence’s father. Long
worried by “my ill state of health” and perhaps now
anticipating her own death, Prudence has inscribed
her initials on the cofﬁn — and, in creating this
embroidery, transformed her personal experience
into a broader meditation on the progression from
birth, to motherhood, to death. Connecticut Historical
Society.

