CHAPTER 4

  Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763

117

Congregationalist minister, thinking him unconverted
and  a  “blind  guide,”  she  sought  out  equality-minded
Quaker and evangelist Baptist churches that welcomed
questioning women such as herself and treated “saved”
women  equally  with  men.  However,  by  the  1760s,
many evangelical congregations had reinstituted men’s
dominance over women. “The government of Church
and  State  must  be . . . family  government”  controlled
by  its  “king,”  declared  the  Danbury  (Connecticut)
Baptist Association.

Farm Property: Inheritance
By contrast, European men who migrated to the colo-
nies  escaped  many  traditional  constraints,  including
the curse of landlessness. “The hope of having land of
their  own  &  becoming  independent  of  Landlords  is
what chiefly induces people into America,” an official
noted  in  the  1730s.  Owning  property  gave  formerly
dependent peasants a new social identity.

Unlike the adventurers seeking riches in other parts
of the Americas, most New England migrants wanted
farms that would provide a living for themselves and
ample land for their children. In this way, they hoped
to secure a competency for their families: the ability to
keep  their  households  solvent  and  independent  and
to pass that ability on to the next generation. Parents
who  could  not  give  their  offspring  land  placed  these
children  as  indentured  servants  in  more  prosperous
households.  When  the  indentures  ended  at  age  eigh-
teen or twenty-one, propertyless sons faced a decades-
long climb up the agricultural ladder, from laborer to
tenant and finally to freeholder.

Sons and daughters in well-to-do farm families were
luckier:  they  received  a  marriage  portion  when  they
were in their early twenties. That portion — land, live-
stock, or farm equipment — repaid them for their past
labor  and  allowed  parents  to  choose  their  marriage
partners. Parents’ security during old age depended on
a wise choice of son- or daughter-in-law. Although the
young  people  could  refuse  an  unacceptable  match,
they did not have the luxury of falling in love with and
marrying whomever they pleased.

Marriage under eighteenth-century English com-
mon law was not a contract between equals. A bride
relinquished to her husband the legal ownership of all
her  property.  After  his  death,  she  received  a  dower
right,  the  right  to  use  (though  not  sell)  one-third  of
the family’s property. On the widow’s death or remar-
riage,  her  portion  was  divided  among  the  children.
Thus the widow’s property rights were subordinate to
those  of  the  family  line,  which  stretched  across  the
generations.

A father’s duty was to provide inheritances for his
children so that one day they could “be for themselves.”
Men who failed to do so lost status in the community.
Some fathers willed the family farm to a single son and
provided  other  children  with  money,  an  apprentice-
ship, or uncleared frontier tracts. Other yeomen moved
their  families  to  the  frontier,  where  life  was  hard  but
land  was  cheap  and  abundant.  “The  Squire’s  House
stands  on  the  Bank  of  the  Susquehannah,”  traveler
Philip  Fithian  reported  from  the  Pennsylvania  back-
country in the early 1760s. “He tells me that he will be
able to settle all his sons and his fair Daughter Betsy on
the Fat of the Earth.”

Freehold Society in Crisis
Because  of  rapid  natural  increase,  New  England’s
population doubled each generation, from 100,000 in
1700, to nearly 200,000 in 1725, to almost 400,000 in
1750.  Farms  had  been  divided  and  then  subdivided,
making them so small — 50 acres or less — that parents
could provide only one child with an adequate inheri-
tance.  In  the  1740s,  the  Reverend  Samuel  Chandler
of  Andover,  Massachusetts,  was  “much  distressed  for
land  for  his  children,”  seven  of  them  young  boys.  A
decade later, in nearby Concord, about 60  percent of
the farmers owned less land than their fathers had.

Because  parents  had  less  to  give  their  sons  and
daughters,  they  had  less  control  over  their  children’s
lives.  The  traditional  system  of  arranged  marriages
broke  down,  as  young  people  engaged  in  premarital
sex  and  then  used  the  urgency  of  pregnancy  to  win
permission to marry. Throughout New England, pre-
marital conceptions rose dramatically, from about 10
percent of firstborn children in the 1710s to more than
30 percent in the 1740s. Given another chance, young
people “would do the same again,” an Anglican minis-
ter observed, “because otherwise they could not obtain
their parents’ consent to marry.”

Even as New England families changed, they main-
tained  the  freeholder  ideal.  Some  parents  chose  to
have  smaller  families  and  used
birth control to do so: abstention,
coitus  interruptus,  or  primitive
condoms.  Other  families  peti-
tioned the provincial government
for frontier land grants and hacked
new  farms  out  of  the  forests  of
central  Massachusetts,  western
Connecticut, and eventually New
Hampshire  and  Vermont.  Still  others  improved  their
farms’ productivity by replacing the traditional English
crops of wheat and barley with high-yielding potatoes

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors threatened
the freeholder ideal in
midcentury New England,
and what strategies did
farming families use to
preserve this ideal?

