T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Women’s Labor

As these documents show, women bore the responsibility for a wide variety of
work, from keeping up households to supporting themselves independently.

father gives me the land or not; and therefore I design
many years hence when oaks are more valueable than
they are now — which you know they will be when we
come to build fleets.”
[c. June 1742]
“I am engaged with the rudiments of the law to which

I am yet but a stranger. . . . If You will not laugh too
immoderately at me I’ll Trust you with a secrett. I have
made two wills already.”

3.  Mary Vial Holyoke, diary excerpts, 1761. Mary Vial
Holyoke, wife of a prominent physician in Salem,
Massachusetts, kept a diary that offers a glimpse
of the range of household tasks women faced.

[1761]
Jan. 16: Began upon the firkin of butter of 40 lb. . . .
22: Bo’t hog, weighed 182 pounds, at 2/5. Salted hog with
half Lisbon & half saltertudas [Tortugas] salt. . . .
Mar. 4: Ironing. . . .
7: Scower’d pewter. . . .
17: Made the Dr. six Cravats marked H. . . .
Apr. 17: Made soap. . . .
23: Dressed a Calves Head turtle fashion. . . .
May 20: Began to whitewash. . . .
28: Ironed. . . .
30: Scower’d pewter. . . .
July 7: Scowered rooms. . . .

4.  Colonial house interiors in Germantown, Pennsyl-
vania, and Augusta, Maine. These images show
the dining room of Benjamin Chew, a wealthy
Philadelphia lawyer (below), and the kitchen of
the Howards, an extended family of soldiers and
merchants on the Maine frontier (opposite).

1.  Thomas Tusser, Five Hundred Pointes of Good Hus-

bandrie, 1557. Advice manuals like Tusser’s circulated
for generations and offered guidance on household
management. In this couplet, Tusser stresses the vir-
tues of a wife’s economy and hard work.

Wife, make thine own candle,
Spare penny to handle.
Provide for thy tallow ere frost cometh in,
And make thine own candle ere winter begin.

2.  Eliza Lucas, letters, 1740–1742. George Lucas

owned three South Carolina plantations, but, as
lieutenant governor of Antigua, he was frequently
absent. When his daughter was sixteen, he gave
her responsibility for managing them. She intro-
duced indigo cultivation in South Carolina, and it
soon became the colony’s second-leading cash
crop. These letters were written when she was
between the ages of eighteen and twenty.

May 2, 1740

“I have the business of 3 plantations to transact, which

requires much writing and more business and fatigue of
other sorts than you can imagine. But least you should
imagine it too burthensom to a girl at my early time of life,
give me leave to answer you: I assure you I think myself
happy that I can be useful to so good a father, and by rising
very early I find I can go through much business.”

July 1740
“Wrote my Father a very long letter on his plantation

affairs and on . . . the pains I had taken to bring the
Indigo, Ginger, Cotton and Lucerne and Casada to per-
fection, and had greater hopes from the Indigo . . . than
any of the rest of the things I tried.”

February 6, 1741
“. . . I have a Sister to instruct and a parcel of little

Negroes whom I have undertaken to teach to read.”

April 23, 1741
“Wrote to my Father informing him of the loss of a

Negro man — also the boat being overset in Santilina
[Saint Helena] Sound and 20 barrels of Rice lost.”

[1742]
“Wont you laugh at me if I tell you I am so busey in
providing for Posterity I hardly allow my self time to Eat
or sleep. . . . I am making a large plantation of Oaks
which I look upon as my own property, whether my

118

Source: Photo by Ron Blunt, Courtesy of Cliveden, a
National Trust Historic Site, Philadelphia, PA.

