MOLL PLACKET-HOLE was born in a Bawdy House in
a Lane in the City of Brotherly Love. . . . [A]t the Age of
twelve (Shocking to consider!) . . . [her] Mother sold her
Virginity — sold it for the Trifling Consideration of Ten
Pounds. Her Purchaser was soon cloyed and abandoned
her. Virtue lost and good Reputation (if ever she had it)
gone, she commenced open Prostitute and dealt out her
Favours to the highest Bidder. . . . [S]he understood the
Trade and set up a Bawdy-House. . . . It was necessary,
however, that a Man should live with her, that they might
appear to the Publick, as honest Housekeepers. . . . The
Trade became at last so publick, that it gave Offence to her
sober Neighbours. . . . [T]he Town tired out with her Inso-
lence, and her Escape from Justice in a regular Manner,
set a Mob (many of whom had been her Beneficiaries)
upon her. They pulled down her House, and destroyed
her Furniture &c. She stormed and raged and swore if her
Customers would not build her a better House, she would
expose them. . . . They opened a Subscription, and a hun-
dred Pounds were subscribed in one Day.

Sources: (1) Alice Morse Earle, Home Life in the Colonial Days (New York: The
Macmillan Company, 1898), 35; (2) From The Letterbook of Eliza Lucas Pinckney,
1739–1762, edited by Elise Pinckney, University of North Carolina Press, 1972. Based
on original documents from the South Carolina Historical Society. Courtesy of the
South Carolina Historical Society; (3) George Francis Dow, ed., The Holyoke Diaries,
1709–1856 (Salem, MA: The Essex Institute, 1911), 49–51; (6) Hilliad Magna: Being the
Life and Adventures of Moll Placket-Hole ([Philadelphia]: Printed [by Anthony
Armbruster], 1765).

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Compare the advice manual (source 1) with Eliza Lucas’s
letters and Mary Vial Holyoke’s diary. What themes do
they share in common, and how do these women’s expe-
riences deviate from the expectations of the advice book
authors?

2.  Eliza Lucas supervised slave labor, and Mary Vial Holyoke
very likely employed servants. How do these facts affect
the way you interpret sources 2 and 3?

3.  Compare the two house interiors (source 4). What work
would women have done in these spaces? The Chews
were a slaveholding family, and the Howards probably
employed servants. With that in mind, consider the rela-
tionship between supervisory and manual labor.

4.  Hannah Breintnall was a well-to-do widow, while Moll
Placket-Hole was a ﬁctional stereotype. What does
Breintnall’s experience tell us about the prospects of a
woman living without a male protector? How does Moll
Placket-Hole shed light on popular attitudes toward such
women?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

With all these sources in mind, write a short essay that
considers the role of hierarchy and social power in women’s
work. How did economic and social status affect the work
that was expected of women? How did the women whose
lives are documented here navigate the challenges and
opportunities they faced? And how does the satire of Moll
Placket-Hole illuminate popular attitudes toward women’s
work and its place in colonial society?

119

Source: Old Fort Western, Augusta, Maine.

5.  Business advertisement in the Pennsylvania

Gazette, 1758. Not all women’s work was done
in the home. Hannah Breintnall, a Philadelphia
widow, ran a tavern before opening a shop
specializing in eyeglasses.

Source: Library Company of Philadelphia.

6.  Hilliad Magna: Being the Life and Adventures of
Moll Placket-Hole, 1765. Moll Placket-Hole was a
satirical, seven-page pamphlet that purported to
describe the life of a Philadelphia prostitute. Moll
was an eighteenth-century term for a loose woman
or prostitute, while placket-hole referred to a slit
that might be found in a woman’s skirt.

