120

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

and maize (Indian corn). Corn was an especially wise
choice:  good  for  human  consumption,  as  well  as  for
feeding cattle and pigs, which provided milk and meat.
Gradually, New England changed from a grain to a live-
stock  economy,  becoming  a  major  exporter  of  salted
meat to the plantations of the West Indies.

As  the  population  swelled,  New  England  farmers
developed the full potential of what one historian has
called the “household mode of production,” in which
families  swapped  labor  and  goods.  Women  and  chil-
dren  worked  in  groups  to  spin  yarn,  sew  quilts,  and
shuck corn. Men loaned neighbors tools, draft animals,
and grazing land. Farmers plowed fields owned by arti-
sans  and  shopkeepers,  who  repaid  them  with  shoes,
furniture, or store credit. Partly because currency was
in short supply, no cash changed hands. Instead, farm-
ers,  artisans,  and  shopkeepers  recorded  debits  and
credits and “balanced” the books every few years. This
system  helped  New  Englanders  to  maximize  agricul-
tural output and preserve the freehold ideal.

Diversity in the
Middle Colonies
The  Middle  colonies — New  York,  New  Jersey,  and
Pennsylvania — became  home  to  peoples  of  differing
origins,  languages,  and  religions.  Scots-Irish  Presby-
terians, English and Welsh Quakers, German Lutherans
and  Moravians,  Dutch  Reformed  Protestants,  and
others  all  sought  to  preserve  their  cultural  and  reli-
gious identities as they pursued economic opportunity.
At the same time, rapid population growth throughout
the region strained public institutions, pressured Indian
lands, and created a dynamic but unstable society.

Economic Growth, Opportunity,
and Conflict
Previously home to New Netherland and New Sweden,
the Mid-Atlantic region was already ethnically diverse
before  England  gained  control  of  it.  The  founding  of
Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey  amplified  this  pattern.
Fertile  land  seemed  abundant,  and  grain  exports  to
Europe  and  the  West  Indies  financed  the  colonies’
rapid settlement (America Compared, p. 121). Between
1720 and 1770, a growing demand for wheat, corn, and
flour  doubled  their  prices  and  brought  people  and
prosperity  to  the  region.  Yet  that  very  growth  led  to
conflict, both within the Middle colonies and in their
relations with Native American neighbors.

Tenancy in New York
In New York’s fertile Hudson
River Valley, wealthy Dutch and English families pre-
sided over the huge manors created by the Dutch West
India Company and English governors (Map 4.1). Like
Chesapeake planters, the New York landlords aspired
to live in the manner of the European gentry but found
that  few  migrants  wanted  to  labor  as  peasants.  To

0

0

10

10

20 miles

20 kilometers

Mohawk
R.

Schenectady

ⓦ

ⓦ

Troy

Albany

ⓦ

Rensselaerswyck
Manor

Hudson

ⓦ

Livingston
Manor

Great Nine
Partners

Beekman
Patent

NEW YORK

Little Nine
Partners

Kingston

ⓦ

.

R
n
o
s
d
u
H
Poughkeepsie

ⓦ

Newburgh

ⓦ

Philipse
Patent

Cortlandt
Manor

VERMONT
(claimed by New York,
Massachusetts, and
New Hampshire)

S
IN
A
T
N
U
O
M

W

N

S

E

MASSACHUSETTS

E
R
I
H
S
K
R
E
B

.
R
t
u
c
i

nnect

o
C

CONNECTICUT

Housato

n
ic
R.

Oblong
Patent

Philipsburg
Manor

ⓦ

NEW JERSEY

White Plains

Long Island Sound

New York City

ⓦ

Morissania
Manor

Long Island

Saint George Manor

Manor boundary
Disputed colonial boundary

MAP 4.1
The Hudson River Manors

Dutch and English manorial lords owned much of the
fertile east bank of the Hudson River, where they leased
farms on perpetual contracts to German tenants and
refused to sell land to freehold-seeking migrants from
overcrowded New England. This powerful landed elite
produced aristocratic-minded Patriot leaders such as
Gouverneur Morris and Robert Livingston, as well as
prominent American families such as the Roosevelts.

