A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Transatlantic Migration,

1500–1760

The following graph compares the number of European and African migrants
who arrived in the American colonies of Spain, Portugal, Britain, France, and the
Netherlands. It also charts change over time: while immigrants in the sixteenth
and  early  seventeenth  centuries  went  predominantly  to  the  colonies  of  Spain
and Portugal, Britain’s colonies became the principal destination for both Euro-
peans and Africans between 1640 and 1760.

2,000,000

1,500,000

1,000,000

1,313,000

763,000

661,000

500,000

397,000

0

1,910,000

FIGURE 4.1
Transatlantic Migration

Source of data: Stanley L. Engerman and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Factor
Endowments, Institutions, and Differential Paths of Growth Among New
World Economies: A View from Economic Historians of the United States,”
in How Latin America Fell Behind: Economic Histories of Brazil and Mexico,
1800–1914, ed. Stephen Haber (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press,
1997), 264.

547,000

130,000

190,000

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  What relationship do you see between the number of
European emigrants and the importation of African
slaves? Which nation’s colonies had the highest percent-
age of Africans relative to Europeans? Which had the
lowest? Which time periods had the highest and lowest
percentages of Africans?

3,000

10,000

2.  Compare France and the Netherlands to Spain, Portu-

Spain

Portugal

Britain

France Netherlands

1500–1640
1641–1760

Africans
Europeans

gal, and Britain. Why do you suppose that the ratio of
Africans to Europeans is so much higher in French and
Dutch colonies than in the other nations? Which type of
colony — tribute, plantation, or neo-European — was likely
to have been most important to the French and Dutch?

attract tenants, the manorial lords granted long leases,
with the right to sell improvements such as houses and
barns to the next tenant. They nevertheless struggled to
populate their estates.

Most  tenant  families  hoped  that  with  hard  work
and  ample  sales  they  could  eventually  buy  their  own
farmsteads. But preindustrial technology limited out-
put. A worker with a hand sickle could reap only half
an acre of wheat, rye, or oats a day. The cradle scythe, a
tool  introduced  during  the  1750s,  doubled  or  tripled
the amount of grain one worker could cut. Even so, a
family with two adult workers could reap only about
12  acres  of  grain,  or  roughly  150  to  180  bushels  of
wheat. After saving enough grain for food and seed, the
surplus might be worth £15 — enough to buy salt and
sugar, tools, and cloth, but little else. The road to land-
ownership was not an easy one.

Conflict  in  the  Quaker  Colonies
In  Quaker-
dominated  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey,  wealth  was
initially  distributed  more  evenly  than  in  New  York,

but  the  proprietors  of  each  colony,  like  the  manor
lords  of  New  York,  had  enormous  land  claims.  The
first migrants lived simply in small, one- or two-room
houses with a sleeping loft, a few benches or stools, and
some  wooden  platters  and  cups.  Economic  growth
brought greater prosperity, along with conflicts between
ordinary settlers and the proprietors who tried to con-
trol their access to land, resources, and political power.
William Penn’s early appeals to British Quakers and
continental  Protestants  led  to  a  boom  in  immigrants.
When  these  first  arrivals  reported  that  Pennsylvania
and New Jersey were “the best poor man’s country in
the world,” thousands more followed. Soon the propri-
etors of both colonies were overwhelmed by the demand
for land. By the 1720s, many new migrants were forced
to  become  squatters,  settling  illegally  on  land  they
hoped eventually to be able to acquire on legal terms.

Frustration over the lack of land led the Penn family
to perpetrate one of the most infamous land frauds of
the eighteenth century, the so-called Walking Purchase
of 1737, in which they exploited an old (and probably

121

