CHAPTER 4

  Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763

123

in Philadelphia, including Anglicans, Baptists, Quakers,
Swedish  and  German  Lutherans,  Mennonites,  Scots-
Irish Presbyterians, and Roman Catholics.

Migrants preserved their cultural identity by mar-
rying  within  their  ethnic  groups.  A  major  exception
was the Huguenots, Calvinists who had been expelled
from  Catholic  France  in  the  1680s  and  resettled  in
Holland, England, and the British colonies. Huguenots
in American port cities such as Boston, New York, and
Charleston quickly lost their French identities by inter-
marrying with other Protestants. More typical were the
Welsh  Quakers  in  Chester  County,  Pennsylvania:  70
percent of the children of the original Welsh migrants
married other Welsh Quakers, as did 60 percent of the
third generation.

In Pennsylvania and western New Jersey, Quakers
shaped  the  culture  because  of  their numbers,  wealth,
and social cohesion. Most Quakers came from English
counties  with  few  landlords  and  brought  with  them

traditions of local village governance, popular partici-
pation in politics,  and  social  equality.  But  after  1720,
the  growth  of  German  and  Scots-Irish  populations
challenged their dominance.

The German Influx  The Quaker vision of a “peace-
able  kingdom”  attracted  100,000  German  migrants
who had fled their homelands because of military con-
scription,  religious  persecution,  and  high  taxes.  First
to  arrive,  in  1683,  were  the  Mennonites,  religious
dissenters  drawn  by  the  promise  of  freedom  of  wor-
ship. In the 1720s, a larger wave of German migrants
arrived from the overcrowded villages of southwestern
Germany and Switzerland. “Wages were far better” in
Pennsylvania,  Heinrich  Schneebeli  reported  to  his
friends  in  Zurich,  and  “one  also  enjoyed  there  a  free
unhindered  exercise  of  religion.”  A  third  wave  of
Germans  and  Swiss — nearly  40,000  strong — landed
in  Philadelphia  between  1749  and  1756.  To  help  pay

A Quaker Meeting for Worship

Quakers dressed plainly and met for worship in unadorned buildings, sitting in silence until inspired by
an “inner light.” Women spoke during meetings on terms of near-equality to men, a tradition that
prepared Quaker women to take a leading part in the nineteenth-century women’s rights movement.
In this English work, titled Quaker Meeting, an elder (his hat on a peg above his head) conveys his
thoughts to the congregation. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. M. and M. Karolik Collection.

