124

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

The Demory House, c. 1780

The Demory House lies near the Shenandoah
Valley in northwestern Virginia and was probably
built by a migrant from Pennsylvania according
to a German design used by both German and
Scots-Irish settlers. The house is small but sturdy.
It measures 20 feet by 14 feet deep and has
one and a half stories. The two ﬁrst-ﬂoor rooms,
a kitchen and a parlor, are separated by an
18 × 18–inch square chimney set in the center
of the house, as well as the stairs leading up to
the sleeping chamber. Clay and small stones ﬁll
the gaps in the exterior walls, which consist of
timber planking about 12 inches tall and 6 to
8 inches wide. © 2003 Copyright and All Rights
Reserved by Christopher C. Fennell.

seventeenth  century  to  solidify  English  rule  there.
Once  in  Ireland,  the  Scots  faced  hostility  from  both
Irish Catholics and English officials and landlords. The
Irish Test Act of 1704 restricted voting and office hold-
ing  to  members  of  the  Church  of  England,  English
mercantilist regulations placed heavy import duties on
linens made by Scots-Irish weavers, and farmers paid
heavy  taxes.  This  persecution  made  America  seem
desirable.  “Read  this  letter,  Rev.  Baptist  Boyd,”  a
migrant to New York wrote back to his minister, “and
tell all the poor folk of ye place that God has opened a
door for their deliverance . . . all that a man works for
is his own; there are no revenue hounds to take it from
us here.”

Lured  by  such  reports,  thousands  of  Scots-Irish
families sailed for the colonies. By 1720, most migrated
to  Philadelphia,  attracted  by  the  religious  tolerance
there.  Seeking  cheap  land,  they  moved  to  central
Pennsylvania and to the fertile Shenandoah Valley to
the south. Governor William Gooch of Virginia wel-
comed the Scots-Irish presence to secure “the Country
against  the  Indians.”  An  Anglican  planter,  however,
thought them as dangerous as “the Goths and Vandals
of  old”  had  been  to  the  Roman  Empire.  Like  the
Germans, the Scots-Irish retained their culture, living
in  ethnic  communities  and  holding  firm  to  the
Presbyterian Church.

the costs of the expensive trip from the Rhine Valley,
German immigrants pioneered the redemptioner sys-
tem,  a  flexible  form  of  indentured  servitude  that
allowed  families  to  negotiate  their  own  terms  upon
arrival. Families often indentured one or more children
while their parents set up a household of their own.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What attracted German
and Scots-Irish migrants to
Pennsylvania in such large
numbers?

Germans soon dominated many districts in eastern
Pennsylvania,  and  thousands  more  moved  down  the
fertile Shenandoah Valley into the western backcoun-
try of Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas (Map 4.2).
Many  migrants  preserved  their
cultural  identity  by  settling  in
German-speaking  Lutheran  and
Reformed
that
endured  well  beyond  1800.  A
minister
in  North  Carolina
admonished young people “not to
contract any marriages with the English or Irish,” argu-
ing that “we owe it to our native country to do our part
that German blood and the German language be pre-
served in America.”

communities

These  settlers  were  willing  colonial  subjects  of
Britain’s German-born and German-speaking Protes-
tant monarchs, George I (r. 1714–1727) and George II
(r. 1727–1760). They generally avoided politics except
to  protect  their  cultural  practices;  for  example,  they
insisted  that  married  women  have  the  legal  right  to
hold property and write wills, as they did in Germany.

Scots-Irish  Settlers  Migrants  from  Ireland,  who
numbered about 115,000, were the most numerous of
the incoming Europeans. Some were Irish and Catholic,
but most were Scots and Presbyterian, the descendants
of the Calvinist Protestants sent to Ireland during the

Religion and Politics
In  Western  Europe,  the  leaders  of  church  and  state
condemned  religious  diversity.  “To  tolerate  all  [reli-
gions] without controul is the way to have none at all,”
declared  an  Anglican  clergyman.  Orthodox  church

