CHAPTER 4

  Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763

125

MAP 4.2
Ethnic and Racial Diversity in the
British Colonies, 1775

In 1700, most colonists in British
North America were of English origin;
by 1775, settlers of English descent
constituted only about 50 percent
of the total population. African
Americans now accounted for one-
third of the residents of the South,
while tens of thousands of German
and Scots-Irish migrants added ethnic
and religious diversity in the Middle
colonies, the southern backcountry,
and northern New England (see
Figure 4.2).

ALGONQUIN

Q U E B E C

Scots and Scots Irish made up
15 percent of the population.

ME.
(MASS.)

VT.
(part of
N.Y.)

N.H.

N.Y.

L. Ontario

IROQUOIS

ABENAKI

MASS.

R.I.

CONN.

n
a
g
i
h
c
i

M
L

.

L. H

u
r
o
n

OTTAWA

L. Erie

DELAWARE

MIAMI

Those of German ancestry
made up about 7 percent of
the population.

SHAWNEE

   M

VA.

N
A
I
H
C
A
L
A
P
P
A

PENN.

S
N
I
A
T
N
U
O

MD.

N

W

E

S

N.J.

DEL.

ATLANTIC OCEAN

People of African origin
accounted for 20 percent of the
total population and were
particularly numerous in the South.

CHEROKEE

N.C.

CATAWBA

S.C.

CHICKASAW

CHOCTAW

GA.

CREEK

FLORIDA

0

0

100

200 miles

100

200 kilometers

Predominant Ethnic Group

African
Dutch
English

German

Scots-Irish
Scots
Swedish
Welsh

officials carried such sentiments to Pennsylvania. “The
preachers do not have the power to punish anyone, or
to force anyone to go to church,” complained Gottlieb
Mittelberger,  an  influential  German  minister.  As  a
result, “Sunday is very badly kept. Many people plough,
reap, thresh, hew or split wood and the like.” He con-
cluded: “Liberty in Pennsylvania does more harm than
good to many people, both in soul and body.”

Mittelberger was mistaken. Although ministers in
Pennsylvania could not invoke government authority
to  uphold  religious  values,  the  result  was  not  social
anarchy. Instead, religious sects enforced moral behav-
ior through communal self-discipline. Quaker families
attended a weekly meeting for worship and a monthly
meeting for business; every three months, a committee
reminded parents to provide proper religious instruc-
tion. The committee also supervised adult behavior; a
Chester  County  meeting,  for  example,  disciplined  a
member “to reclaim him from drinking to excess and
keeping vain company.” Significantly, Quaker meetings
allowed  couples  to  marry  only  if  they  had  land  and
livestock sufficient to support a family. As a result, the

children of well-to-do Friends usually married within
the  sect,  while  poor  Quakers  remained  unmarried,
wed  later  in life,  or  married  without  permission — in
which case they were often ousted from the meeting.
These marriage rules helped the Quakers build a self-
contained and prosperous community.

In  the  1740s,  the  flood  of  new  migrants  reduced
Quakers  to  a  minority — a  mere  30  percent  of  Penn-
sylvanians.  Moreover,  Scots-Irish  settlers  in  central
Pennsylvania  demanded  an  aggressive  Indian  policy,
challenging  the  pacifism  of  the
assembly.  To
retain  power,
Quaker politicians sought an alli-
ance with those German religious
groups  that  also  embraced  paci-
fism and voluntary (not compul-
sory) militia service. In response,
German leaders demanded more
seats  in  the  assembly  and  laws
that  respected  their
inheritance  customs.  Other
Germans — Lutherans and Baptists — tried to gain con-
trol of the assembly by forming a “general confederacy”

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
What issues divided the
various ethnic and reli-
gious groups of the Middle
colonies? What core values
did they agree upon?

