126

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

with Scots-Irish Presbyterians. An observer predicted
that  the  scheme  was  doomed  to  failure  because  of
“mutual jealousy” (Map 4.3).

By the 1750s, politics throughout the Middle colo-
nies  roiled  with  conflict.  In  New  York,  a  Dutchman
declared that he “Valued English Law no more than a
Turd,” while in Pennsylvania, Benjamin Franklin dis-
paraged  the  “boorish”  character  and  “swarthy  com-
plexion”  of  German  migrants.  Yet  there  was  broad
agreement  on  the  importance  of  economic  opportu-
nity  and  liberty  of  conscience.  The  unstable  balance
between shared values and mutual mistrust prefigured
tensions  that  would  pervade  an  increasingly  diverse
American society in the centuries to come.

ME.
(MASS.)

VT.
(N.Y.)

N.H.

L. Ontario

NEW YORK

(cid:6)
(cid:6) (cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)(cid:6)
(cid:6)

MASS.
(cid:7)

CONN.
(cid:7)
(cid:7)

(cid:7)
(cid:7)

(cid:7) (cid:7)
(cid:7)
(cid:7)
(cid:7)
(cid:6)
(cid:7)(cid:7)

(cid:7)

R.I.

L. Erie

(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)(cid:6) (cid:7)
(cid:7)
(cid:7)

(cid:6)

(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:7) (cid:7)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:7) (cid:7)
(cid:7)
(cid:6)(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:6)
(cid:7)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)(cid:6)
N.J.
(cid:6)
(cid:7)(cid:7)
(cid:6)(cid:6)
(cid:7)
(cid:7)
(cid:7)

MD.

(cid:7)

DEL.

PENNSYLVANIA

(cid:7)

(cid:6)

(cid:7)

(cid:6)

(cid:7)

(cid:7)

(cid:6)

VIRGINIA

N

W

E

S

(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:7)

ATLANTIC OCEAN

(cid:7)

(cid:7)

(cid:7)

NORTH
CAROLINA

SOUTH
CAROLINA

(cid:6)

(cid:7)(cid:6)
(cid:7)

(cid:7)

0

0

GA.

(cid:7)

100

200 miles

100

200 kilometers

Anglican

Congregational
Lutheran
Presbyterian
Baptist
Roman Catholic
Jewish

(cid:7)
(cid:7)
(cid:7)

Reformed Churches
Dutch
German
French
Quaker

(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)

(cid:6)

MAP 4.3
Religious Diversity in 1750

By 1750, religious diversity was on the rise, not only
in the multiethnic Middle colonies but also in all of
British North America. Baptists had increased their
numbers in New England, long the stronghold of
Congregationalists, and would soon become important
in Virginia. Already there were considerable numbers of
Presbyterians, Lutherans, and German Reformed in the
South, where Anglicanism was the established religion.

Commerce, Culture,
and Identity
After 1720, transatlantic shipping grew more frequent
and  Britain  and  its  colonies  more  closely  connected,
while a burgeoning print culture flooded the colonies
with information and ideas. Two great European cul-
tural movements — the Enlightenment, which empha-
sized  the  power  of  human  reason  to  understand  and
shape the world; and Pietism, an evangelical Christian
movement that stressed the individual’s personal rela-
tionship  with  God — reached  America  as  a  result.  At
the same time, an abundance of imported goods began
to  reshape  material  culture,  bringing  new  comforts
into the lives of the middling sort while allowing pros-
perous  merchants  and  landowners  to  set  themselves
apart from their neighbors in new ways.

Transportation and the
Print Revolution
In  the  eighteenth  century,  improved  transportation
networks  opened  Britain’s  colonies  in  new  ways,  and
British shipping came to dominate the north Atlantic.
In 1700, Britain had 40,000 sailors; by 1750, the num-
ber had grown to 60,000, while many more hailed from
the  colonies.  An  enormous  number  of  vessels  plied
Atlantic waters: in the late 1730s, more than 550 ships
arrived in Boston annually. About a tenth came directly
from  Britain  or  Ireland;  the  rest  came  mostly  from
other British colonies, either on the mainland or in the
West Indies.

A road network slowly took shape as well, though
roadbuilding  was  expensive  and  difficult.  In  1704,
Sarah  Kemble  Knight  traveled  from  Boston  to  New
York on horseback. The road was “smooth and even” in
some places, treacherous in others; it took eight days of
hard riding to cover 200 miles. Forty years later, a phy-
sician from Annapolis, Maryland, traveled along much
better  roads  to  Portsmouth,  New  Hampshire,  and
back — more  than  1,600  miles  in  all.  He  spent  four
months on the road, stopping frequently to meet the
locals and satisfy his curiosity. By the mid-eighteenth
century,  the  “Great  Wagon  Road”  carried  migrating
families  down  the  Shenandoah  Valley  as  far  as  the
Carolina backcountry.

All of these water and land routes carried people,
produce, and finished merchandise. They also carried
information,  as  letters,  newspapers,  pamphlets,  and
crates of books began to circulate widely. The trip across
the Atlantic took seven to eight weeks on average, so

