CHAPTER 4

  Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763

127

the news arriving in colonial ports was not fresh by our
standard,  but  compared  to  earlier  years,  the  colonies
were awash in information.

Until 1695, the British government had the power
to censor all printed materials. In that year, Parliament
let the Licensing Act lapse, and the floodgates opened.
Dozens  of  new  printshops  opened  in  London  and
Britain’s provincial cities. They printed newspapers and
pamphlets;  poetry,  ballads,  and  sermons;  and  hand-
bills,  tradesman’s  cards,  and  advertisements.  Larger
booksellers  also  printed  scientific  treatises,  histories,
travelers’ accounts, and novels. The result was a print
revolution.  In  Britain  and  throughout  Europe,  print
was  essential  to  the  transmission  of  new  ideas,  and
both the Enlightenment and Pietism took shape in part
through its growing influence.

All this material crossed the Atlantic and filled the
shops of colonial booksellers. The colonies also began
printing  their  own  newspapers.  In  1704,  the  Boston
Newsletter was founded; by 1720, Boston had five print-
ing  presses  and  three  newspapers;  and  by  1776,  the
thirteen  colonies  that  united  in  declaring  indepen-
dence had thirty-seven newspapers among them. This
world  of  print  was  essential  to  their  ability  to  share
grievances and join in common cause.

The Enlightenment in America
To explain the workings of the natural world, some col-
onists  relied  on  folk  wisdom.  Swedish  migrants  in
Pennsylvania  attributed  magical  powers  to  the  great
white  mullein,  a  common  wildflower,  and  treated
fevers by tying the plant’s leaves around their feet and
arms. Traditionally, Christians believed that the earth
stood at the center of the universe, and God (and Satan)
intervened directly and continuously in human affairs.
The  scientific  revolution  of  the  sixteenth  and  seven-
teenth centuries challenged these ideas, and educated
people — most of them Christians — began to modify
their views accordingly.

The European Enlightenment
In 1543, the Polish
astronomer  Copernicus  published  his  observation
that  the  earth  traveled  around  the  sun,  not  vice
versa. Copernicus’s discovery suggested that humans
occupied  a  more  modest  place  in  the  universe  than
Christian theology assumed. In the next century, Isaac
Newton,  in  his  Principia  Mathematica  (1687),  used
the  sciences  of  mathematics  and  physics  to  explain
the  movement  of  the  planets  around  the  sun  (and
invented calculus in the process). Though Newton was
himself profoundly religious, in the long run his work

undermined  the  traditional  Christian  understanding
of the cosmos.

In the century between the Principia Mathematica
and the French Revolution of 1789, the philosophers of
the European Enlightenment used empirical research
and  scientific  reasoning  to  study  all  aspects  of  life,
including  social  institutions  and  human  behavior.
Enlightenment  thinkers  advanced  four  fundamental
principles: the lawlike order of the natural world, the
power of human reason, the “natural rights” of individ-
uals (including the right to self-government), and the
progressive improvement of society.

English  philosopher  John  Locke  was  a  major
contributor  to  the  Enlightenment.  In  his  Essay  Con-
cern ing Human Understanding (1690), Locke stressed
the impact of environment and experience on human
behavior  and  beliefs,  arguing
that  the  character  of  individuals
and  societies  was  not  fixed  but
could  be  changed  through  edu-
thought,  and
cation,  rational
purposeful  action.  Locke’s  Two
Treatises  of  Gov ernment  (1690)
advanced  the  revolutionary  the-
ory  that  political  authority  was  not  given  by  God  to
monarchs,  as  James  II  had  insisted  (see  Chapter  3).
Instead,  it  derived  from  social  compacts  that  people
made  to  preserve  their  natural  rights  to  life,  liberty,
and property. In Locke’s view, the people should have
the  power  to  change  government  policies — or  even
their form of government.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What conditions and ideas
lay behind the emergence
of the Enlightenment in
America?

Some clergymen responded to these developments
by  devising  a  rational  form  of  Christianity.  Rejecting
supernatural  interventions  and  a  vengeful  Calvinist
God,  Congregationalist  minister  Andrew  Eliot  main-
tained  that  “there  is  nothing  in  Christianity  that  is
contrary  to  reason.”  The  Reverend  John  Wise  of
Ipswich,  Massachusetts,  used  Locke’s  philosophy  to
defend giving power to ordinary church members. Just
as the social compact formed the basis of political soci-
ety, Wise argued, so the religious covenant among the
lay members of a congregation made them — not the
bishops  of  the  Church  of  England  or  even  ministers
like  himself — the  proper  interpreters  of  religious
truth. The Enlightenment influenced Puritan minister
Cotton  Mather  as  well.  When  a  measles  epidemic
ravaged  Boston  in  the  1710s,  Mather  thought  that
only  God  could  end  it;  but  when  smallpox  struck  a
decade later, he used his newly acquired knowledge of
inoculation — gained  in  part  from  a  slave,  who  told
him  of  the  practice’s  success  in  Africa — to  advocate
this scientific preventive for the disease.

