128

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

Enlightenment Philanthropy: Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia

Using public funds and private donations, Philadelphia reformers built this imposing structure in
1753. The new hospital embodied two principles of the Enlightenment: that purposeful actions
could improve society, and that the products of these actions should express reason and order,
exhibited here in the building’s symmetrical facade. Etchings like this one from the 1760s (A
Perspective View of the Pennsylvania Hospital, by John Streeper and Henry Dawkins) circulated
widely and bolstered Philadelphia’s reputation as the center of the American Enlightenment.
Historical Society of Pennsylvania.

Franklin’s  Contributions  Benjamin  Franklin  was
the exemplar of the American Enlightenment. Born in
Boston in 1706 to devout Calvinists, he grew to man-
hood  during  the  print  revolution.  Apprenticed  to  his
brother,  a  Boston  printer,  Franklin  educated  himself
through  voracious  reading.  At  seventeen,  he  fled  to
Philadelphia,  where  he  became  a  prominent  printer,
and  in  1729  he  founded  the  Pennsylvania  Gazette,
which  became  one  of  the  colonies’  most  influential
newspapers.  Franklin  also  formed  a  “club  of  mutual
improvement”  that  met  weekly  to  discuss  “Morals,
Politics, or Natural Philosophy.” These discussions, as
well as Enlightenment literature, shaped his thinking.
As  Franklin  explained  in  his  Autobiography  (1771),
“From the different books I read, I began to doubt of
Revelation [God-revealed truth].”

Like  a  small  number  of  urban  artisans,  wealthy
Virginia  planters,  and  affluent  seaport  merchants,
Franklin became a deist. Deism was a way of thinking,
not an established religion. “My own mind is my own
church,”  said  deist  Thomas  Paine.  “I  am  of  a  sect  by

myself,” added Thomas Jefferson. Influenced by Enlight-
enment science, deists such as Jefferson believed that a
Supreme Being (or Grand Architect) created the world
and then allowed it to operate by natural laws but did
not intervene in people’s lives. Rejecting the divinity of
Christ and the authority of the Bible, deists relied on
“natural  reason,”  their  innate  moral  sense,  to  define
right and wrong. Thus Franklin, a onetime slave owner,
came to question the morality of slavery, repudiating it
once he recognized the parallels between racial bond-
age and the colonies’ political bondage to Britain.

Franklin  popularized  the  practical  outlook  of  the
Enlightenment  in  Poor  Richard’s  Almanack  (1732–
1757),  an  annual  publication  that  was  read  by  thou-
sands.  He  also  founded  the  American  Philosophical
Society (1743–present) to promote “useful knowledge.”
Adopting  this  goal  in his  own  life,  Franklin  invented
bifocal lenses for eyeglasses, the Franklin stove, and the
lightning  rod.  His  book  on  electricity,  published  in
England in 1751, won praise as the greatest contribu-
tion to science since Newton’s discoveries. Inspired by

