CHAPTER 4

  Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763

129

with God, Pietism appealed to believers’ hearts rather
than  their  minds  (American  Voices,  p.  130).  In  the
1720s,  German  migrants  carried  Pietism  to  Amer-
ica,  sparking  a  religious  revival  (or  renewal  of  reli-
gious  enthusiasm)  in  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey,
where  Dutch  minister Theodore  Jacob  Frelinghuysen
preached  passionate  sermons  to  German  settlers  and
encouraged church members to spread the message of
spiritual urgency. A decade later, William Tennent and
his  son  Gilbert  copied  Frelinghuysen’s  approach  and
led revivals among Scots-Irish Presbyterians through-
out the Middle Atlantic region.

New  England  Revivalism  Simultaneously,  an
American-born  Pietist  movement  appeared  in  New
England. Revivals of Christian zeal were built into the
logic of Puritanism. In the 1730s, Jonathan Edwards, a
minister in Northampton, Massachusetts, encouraged
a  revival  there  that  spread  to  towns  throughout  the
Connecticut  River  Valley.  Edwards  guided  and
observed  the  process  and  then  published  an  account
entitled A Faithful Narrative of the Surprising Work of
God,  printed  first  in  London  (1737),  then  in  Boston
(1738), and then in German and Dutch translations. Its
publication  history  highlights  the  transatlantic  net-
work of correspondents that gave Pietism much of its
vitality.

Whitefield’s  Great  Awakening  English  minister
George  Whitefield  transformed  the  local  revivals  of
Edwards  and  the  Tennents  into  a  Great  Awakening.
After  Whitefield  had  his  personal  awakening  upon
reading the German Pietists, he became a follower of
John  Wesley,  the  founder  of  English  Methodism.  In
1739,  Whitefield  carried  Wesley’s  fervent  message  to
America, where he attracted huge crowds from Georgia
to Massachusetts.

Whitefield had a compelling presence. “He looked
almost  angelical;  a  young,  slim,  slender  youth . . .
cloathed with authority from the Great God,” wrote a
Connecticut farmer. Like most evangelical preachers,
Whitefield  did  not  read  his  sermons  but  spoke  from
memory. More like an actor than a theologian, he ges-
tured  eloquently,  raised  his  voice  for  dramatic  effect,
and at times assumed a female persona — as a woman
in labor struggling to deliver the word of God. When
the  young  preacher  told  his  spellbound  listeners  that
they had sinned and must seek salvation, some suddenly
felt  a  “new  light”  within  them.  As  “the  power  of  god
come down,” Hannah Heaton recalled, “my knees smote
together . . . [and]  it  seemed  to  me  I  was  a  sinking
down into hell . . . but then I resigned my distress and
was perfectly easy quiet and calm . . . [and] it seemed as

Benjamin Franklin’s Rise

This portrait of Benjamin Franklin, attributed to Robert Feke
and executed around 1746, portrays Franklin as a successful
businessman. His rufﬂed collar and cuffs, his fashionably
curly wig, and his sober but expensive suit reveal his social
ambitions. In later portraits, after he gained fame as an
Enlightenment sage, he dispensed with the wig and chose
more unaffected poses; but in 1746, he was still establishing
his credentials as a young Philadelphia gentleman on the rise.
Harvard University Art Museum, Fogg Art Museum, Bequest of Dr. John
Collins Warren, 1856, H47 Photo: Imaging Department © President
and Fellows of Harvard College.

Franklin, ambitious printers in America’s seaport cities
published newspapers and gentlemen’s magazines, the
first  significant  nonreligious  periodicals  to  appear  in
the  colonies.  The  European  Enlightenment,  then,
added  a  secular  dimension  to  colonial  cultural  life,
foreshadowing  the  great  contributions  to  republican
political  theory  by  American  intellectuals  of  the
Revolutionary  era:  John  Adams,  James  Madison,  and
Thomas Jefferson.

American Pietism and the
Great Awakening
As some colonists turned to deism, thousands of others
embraced Pietism, a Christian movement originating
in  Germany  around  1700  and  emphasizing  pious
behavior  (hence  the  name).  In  its  emotional  worship
services  and  individual  striving  for  a  mystical  union

