A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Evangelical Religion

and Enlightenment

Rationalism

Two great historical movements, Enlightenment thought and Pietistic religion,
swept across British North America in the eighteenth century and offered radi-
cally different — indeed, almost completely contradictory — worldviews. Pietism
sparked religious revivals based on passion and emotion, while Enlightenment
rationalism  encouraged  personal  restraint  and  intellectual  logic.  Both  move-
ments  shaped  American  cultural  development:  Pietism  transformed  American
religious  life,  and  Enlightenment  thinking  inﬂuenced  the  principles  of  the
American government.

Sarah Lippet
Death as a Passage to Life

Sarah Lippet was a longtime member of the Baptist church
of Middletown in eastern New Jersey. She died in October
1767 at the age of sixty-one; fellow parishioners reported
her sentiments as she lay, for four days, on her deathbed.

All my lifetime I have been in fears and doubts, but now
am delivered. He hath delivered them who through fear
of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage. For
the love I have for Christ I am willing to part with all
my friends to be with Him, for I love Him above all; yet
it is nothing in me, for I know if I had my desert I should
be in Hell. I believe in Christ, and I know that I put my
whole trust in Him, and he that believeth in Him shall
not be ashamed nor be confounded. . . .

Why do you mourn when I rejoice? You should not; it
is no more for me to die and leave my friends for the great
love I have for Christ than for me to go to sleep. I have no
fears of death in my mind. Christ has the keys of death
and hell, and blessed are the dead that die in the Lord.
I can’t bear to see a tear shed. You should not mourn.

Poor Me — Miserable me. . . . I was loaded with the guilt
of Sin. . . .

Hell fire was most always in my mind; and I have
hundreds of times put my fingers into my pipe when I
have been smoaking to feel how fire felt: And to see how
my Body could bear to lye in Hell fire for ever and
ever. . . . And while these thoughts were in my mind
God appeared unto me and made me Skringe: before
whose face the heavens and the earth fled away; and I
was Shrinked into nothing; I knew not whether I was in
the body or out, I seemed to hang in open Air before
God, and he seemed to Speak to me in an angry and
Sovereign way[:] What? Won’t you trust your Soul with
God?; My heart answered O yes, yes, yes. . . .

When God disappeared or in some measure with-
drew, every thing was in its place again and I was on my
Bed. . . . I was set free, my distress was gone, and I was
filled with a pineing desire to see Christs own words in
the bible; . . . I got the bible up under my Chin and
hugged it; it was sweet and lovely; the word was nigh
[near] me in my hand, then I began to pray and to
praise God.

Source: “The Triumphant Christian,” in Historical and Genealogical Miscellany, ed.
John E. Stillwell (New York, 1964), 3: 465–466.

Source: “The Spiritual Travels of Nathan Cole, 1741” in The Great Awakening:
Documents on the Revival of Religion, 1740–1745, ed. Richard L. Bushman (New York:
Atheneum, 1970), 68–70.

Nathan Cole
The Struggle for Salvation

Connecticut farmer Nathan Cole found God after listening
to a sermon by George Whiteﬁeld, the great English evan-
gelist. But Cole’s spiritual quest was not easy. He struggled
for two years before coming to believe that he was saved.

Benjamin Franklin
The Importance of a Virtuous Life

Franklin  stood  at  the  center  of  the  American  Enlighten-
ment. In his Autobiography, he outlined his religious views
and his human-centered moral principles.

[After hearing Whitefield] I began to think I was not
Elected, and that God made some for heaven and me for
hell. And I thought God was not Just in so doing. . . . My
heart then rose against God exceedingly, for his making
me for hell; Now this distress lasted Almost two years —

My Parents had early given me religious Impressions,
and brought me through my Childhood piously in the
Dissenting Way. But I was scarce 15 when, after doubting
by turns of several Points as I found them disputed in
the different Books I read, I began to doubt of Revelation

130

