itself. Some Books against Deism fell into my Hands. . . .
It happened that they wrought an Effect on me quite con-
trary to what was intended by them: For the Arguments
of the Deists [that were quoted in those books] appeared
to me much Stronger than the Refutations. In short I soon
became a thorough Deist. . . .

I grew convinc’d that Truth, Sincerity & Integrity
in Dealings between Man & Man, were of the utmost
Importance to the Felicity of Life, and I form’d written
Resolutions, (which still remain in my Journal Book) to
practice them ever while I lived. . . .

About the Year 1734. There arrived among us from
Ireland, a young Presbyterian Preacher named Hemphill,
who delivered with a good Voice, & apparently extem-
pore, most excellent Discourses, which drew together
considerable Numbers of different Persuasions, who
join’d in admiring them. Among the rest I became one
of his constant Hearers, his Sermons pleasing me as they
had little of the dogmatical kind, but inculcated strongly
the Practice of Virtue, or what in the religious Stile are
called Good Works. Those however, of our Congregation,
who considered themselves as orthodox Presbyterians,
disapprov’d his Doctrine, and were join’d by most of the
old Clergy, who arraign’d him of Heterodoxy before the
Synod, in order to have him silenc’d. I became his zealous
Partisan. . . .

I never was without some religious Principles; I never
doubted, for instance, the Existance of the Deity, that he
made the World, & govern’d it by his Providence; that the
most acceptable Service of God was the doing Good to
Man; that our Souls are immortal; and that all Crime will
be punished & Virtue rewarded either here or hereafter;
these I esteem’d the Essentials of every Religion.

Source: Louis P. Masur, ed., The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin, with Related
Documents, 2nd ed. (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2003), 73–74, 93–94, 108.

John Wise
The Primacy of Human Reason
and Natural Laws

Reverend John Wise (1652–1725) served for many years as
a pastor in Ipswich, Massachusetts. A graduate of Harvard
College,  Wise  used  the  Enlightenment  doctrines  of  John
Locke and Samuel von Pufendorf to justify the democratic
structure of New England Congregational churches.

I Shall disclose several Principles of Natural Knowledge;
plainly discovering the Law of Nature; or the true senti-
ments of Natural Reason, with Respect to Mans Being

and Government. . . . I shall consider Man in a state of
Natural Being, as a Free-Born Subject under the Crown
of Heaven, and owing Homage to none but God himself.
It is certain Civil Government in General, is a very
Admirable Result of Providence, and an Incomparable
Benefit to Mankind, yet must needs be acknowledged
to be the Effect of Humane Free-Compacts and not
of Divine Institution; it is the Produce of Mans Reason,
of Humane and Rational Combinations, and not from
any direct Orders of Infinite Wisdom. . . .

The Prime Immunity in Mans State, is that he is
most properly the Subject of the Law of Nature. He is
the Favourite Animal on Earth; in that this Part of Gods
Image, viz. Reason is Congenate with his Nature, wherein
by a Law Immutable, Instampt upon his Frame, God has
provided a Rule for Men in all their Actions; obliging
each one to the performance of that which is Right,
not only as to Justice, but likewise as to all other Moral
Vertues, which is nothing but the Dictate of Right Reason
founded in the Soul of Man. . . .

The Second Great Immunity of Man is an Original

Liberty Instampt upon his Rational Nature. He that
intrudes upon this Liberty, Violates the Law of Nature. . . .

The Third Capital Immunity belonging to Mans
Nature, is an equality amongst Men; Which is not to be
denyed by the Law of Nature, till Man has Resigned him-
self with all his Rights for the sake of a Civil State; and
then his Personal Liberty and Equality is to be cherished,
and preserved to the highest degree.

Source: John Wise, A Vindication of the Government of New England Churches (Boston:
J. Allen, for N. Boone, 1717), 32–40.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  All of these writers declare a belief in God. How do their

beliefs and outlooks differ?

2.  These writers were variously inﬂuenced by the Great

Awakening, the Enlightenment, and rational Christian-
ity. How are these movements reﬂected in the passages
above?

3.  What roles do fear and anxiety play in the experiences

of Sarah Lippet and Nathan Cole? What difference does
it make that neither Franklin nor Wise expresses fear,
either of God or of his own sinfulness?

4.  Benjamin Franklin and John Wise stress the importance
of reason and virtue as guides to human conduct. How
would Nathan Cole and Sarah Lippet react to that
emphasis?

131

