132

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

The Print Revolution and the Great
Awakening

George Whiteﬁeld made his ﬁrst trip to
North America in 1738, when he traveled
to Savannah, Georgia. Benjamin Franklin
published the ﬁrst edition of this journal of
his voyage in Philadelphia in 1739; the copy
pictured here was printed a year later. Texts
like this one highlight the importance of
the print revolution to eighteenth-century
culture: Whiteﬁeld was utterly unknown in
North America until he began publicizing his
ministry and his travels through such works.
Enlightenment ideas, too, were conveyed
to large and far-ﬂung audiences in books,
magazines, and newspapers. Library Company
of Philadelphia.

if  I  had  a  new  soul  &  body  both.”  Strengthened  and
self-confident,  these  converts,  the  so-called  New
Lights, were eager to spread Whitefield’s message.

The rise of print intersected with this enthusiasm.
“Religion is become the Subject of most Conversations,”
the  Pennsylvania  Gazette  reported.  “No  books  are  in
Request but those of Piety and Devotion.” Whitefield
and his circle did their best to answer the demand for
devotional  reading.  As  he  traveled,  Whitefield  regu-
larly sent excerpts of his journal to be printed in news-
papers.  Franklin  printed  Whitefield’s  sermons  and
journals by subscription and found them to be among
his best-selling titles. Printed accounts of Whitefield’s
travels,  conversion  narratives,  sermons,  and  other
devotional literature helped to confirm Pietists in their
faith and strengthen the communication networks that
sustained them.

Religious Upheaval in the North
Like  all  cultural  explosions,  the  Great  Awakening
was controversial. Conservative ministers — passionless
Old Lights, according to the evan-
gelists — condemned the “cryings
out,  faintings  and  convulsions”
in revivalist meetings and the New
Lights’ claims of “working Miracles
or  speaking  with  Tongues.”  Bos-
ton  minister  Charles  Chauncy
attacked  the  Pietist  New  Lights

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
In what ways was the
spread of ideas during the
Enlightenment and the
Great Awakening similar,
and how did it differ?

for allowing women to speak in public: it was “a plain
breach of that commandment of the lord, where it is
said, Let your women keep silence in the churches.” In
Connecticut,  Old  Lights  persuaded  the  legislature  to
prohibit  evangelists  from  speaking  to  a  congregation
without the minister’s permission. But the New Lights
refused to be silenced. Dozens of farmers, women, and
artisans roamed the countryside, condemning the Old
Lights as “unconverted” and willingly accepting impris-
onment: “I shall bring glory to God in my bonds,” a dis-
sident preacher wrote from jail.

The  Great  Awakening  undermined  legally  estab-
lished churches and their tax-supported ministers. In
New  England,  New  Lights  left  the  Congregational
Church  and  founded  125  “separatist”  churches  that
supported their ministers through voluntary contribu-
tions  (Figure  4.3).  Other  religious  dissidents  joined
Baptist congregations, which also condemned govern-
ment  support  of  churches:  “God  never  allowed  any
civil  state  upon  earth  to  impose  religious  taxes,”
declared  Baptist  preacher  Isaac  Backus.  In  New  York
and New Jersey, the Dutch Reformed Church split in
two as New Lights refused to accept doctrines imposed
by conservative church authorities in Holland.

The Great Awakening also appealed to Christians
whose  established  churches  could  not  serve  their
needs. By 1740, Pennsylvania’s German Reformed and
Lutheran congregations suffered from a severe lack of
university-trained  pastors.  In  the  colony’s  Dutch
Reformed, Dutch and Swedish Lutheran, and even its

