CHAPTER 4

  Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763

133

FIGURE 4.3
Church Growth by Denomination, 1700–1780

In 1700, and again in 1740, the Congregationalist and Anglican churches had the most members. By
1780, however, largely because of their enthusiastic evangelical message, Presbyterian and Baptist
congregations outnumbered those of the Anglicans. The growth of immigrant denominations, such
as the German Reformed and Lutheran, was equally impressive.

Anglican congregations, half the pulpits were empty. In
this circumstance, itinerant preachers who stressed the
power of “heart religion” and downplayed the impor-
tance  of  formal  ministerial  training  found  a  ready
audience.

The  Great  Awakening  challenged  the  authority  of
all ministers, whose status rested on respect for their
education and knowledge of the Bible. In an influential
pamphlet,  The  Dangers  of  an  Unconverted  Ministry
(1740), Gilbert Tennent asserted that ministers’ author-
ity  should  come  not  from  theological  knowledge  but
from  the  conversion  experience.  Reaffirming  Martin
Luther’s  belief  in  the  priesthood  of  all  Christians,
Tennent  suggested  that  anyone  who  had  felt  God’s
redeeming grace could speak with ministerial author-
ity.  Sarah  Harrah  Osborn,  a  New  Light  “exhorter”  in
Rhode  Island,  refused  “to  shut  up  my  mouth . . . and
creep into obscurity” when silenced by her minister.

As religious enthusiasm spread, churches founded
new colleges to educate their young men and to train
ministers.  New  Light  Presbyterians  established  the
College  of  New  Jersey  (Princeton)  in  1746,  and  New
York  Anglicans  founded  King’s  College  (Columbia)
in  1754.  Baptists  set  up  the  College  of  Rhode  Island
(Brown) in 1764; two years later, the Dutch Reformed
Church subsidized Queen’s College (Rutgers) in New
Jersey.  However,  the  main  intellectual  legacy  of  the
Great Awakening was not education for the privileged
few but a new sense of authority among the many. A
European visitor to Philadelphia remarked in surprise,
“The  poorest  day-laborer . . . holds  it  his  right  to

advance  his  opinion,  in  religious  as  well  as  political
matters, with as much freedom as the gentleman.”

Social and Religious Conflict
in the South
In the southern colonies, where the Church of England
was legally established, religious enthusiasm triggered
social  conflict.  Anglican  ministers  generally  ignored
the spiritual needs of African Americans and landless
whites,  who  numbered  40  percent  and  20  percent  of
the population, respectively. Middling white freehold-
ers  (35  percent  of  the  residents)  formed  the  core  of
most  Church  of  England  congregations.  But  promi-
nent planters (just 5 percent) held the real power, using
their control of parish finances to discipline ministers.
One clergyman complained that dismissal awaited any
minister who “had the courage to preach against any
Vices taken into favor by the leading Men of his Parish.”

The Presbyterian Revival  Soon, a democratization
of  religion  challenged  the  dominance  of  both  the
Anglican Church and the planter elite. In 1743, brick-
layer  Samuel  Morris,  inspired  by  reading  George
Whitefield’s sermons, led a group of Virginia Anglicans
out  of  their  congregation.  Seeking  a  deeper  religious
experience,  Morris  invited  New  Light  Presbyterian
Samuel Davies to lead their prayer meetings. Davies’s
sermons,  filled  with  erotic  devotional  imagery  and
urging  Christians  to  feel  “ardent  Passion,”  sparked
Presbyterian  revivals  across  the  Tidewater  region,

