134

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

threatening the social authority of the Virginia gentry.
Traditionally,  planters  and  their  well-dressed  families
arrived at Anglican services in fancy carriages drawn
by well-bred horses and flaunted their power by sitting
in the front pews. Such ritual displays of the gentry’s
superiority  were  meaningless  if  freeholders  attended
other  churches.  Moreover,  religious  pluralism  threat-
ened the tax-supported status of the Anglican Church.
To  halt  the  spread  of  New  Light  ideas,  Virginia
governor  William  Gooch  denounced  them  as  “false
teachings,”  and  Anglican  justices  of  the  peace  closed
Presbyterian  churches.  This  harassment  kept  most
white yeomen and poor tenant families in the Church
of England.

The Baptist Insurgency  During the 1760s, the vig-
orous preaching and democratic message of New Light
Baptist  ministers  converted  thousands  of  white  farm
families.  The  Baptists  were  radical  Protestants  whose
central  ritual  was  adult  (rather  than  infant)  baptism.
Once men and women had experienced the infusion of
grace — had been “born again” — they were baptized in
an  emotional  public  ceremony,  often  involving  com-
plete immersion in water.

Slaves were welcome at Baptist revivals. During the
1740s, George Whitefield had urged Carolina planters

to bring their slaves into the Christian fold, but white
opposition  and  the  Africans’  commitment  to  their
ancestral  religions  kept  the  number  of  converts  low.
However, in the 1760s, native-born African Americans
in  Virginia  welcomed  the  Baptists’  message  that  all
people  were  equal  in  God’s  eyes.  Sensing  a  threat  to
the  system  of  racial  slavery,  the  House  of  Burgesses
imposed heavy fines on Baptists who preached to slaves
without their owners’ permission.

Baptists  threatened  gentry  authority  because  they
repudiated  social  distinctions  and  urged  followers  to
call one another “brother” and “sister.” They also con-
demned  the  planters’  decadent  lifestyle.  As  planter
Landon Carter complained, the Baptists were “destroy-
ing pleasure in the Country; for they encourage ardent
Prayer . . . & an intire Banishment of Gaming, Dancing,
&  Sabbath-Day  Diversions.”  The  gentry  responded
with violence. In Caroline County, an Anglican posse
attacked  Brother  John  Waller  at  a  prayer  meeting.
Waller “was violently jerked off the stage; they caught
him by the back part of his neck, beat his head against
the ground, and a gentleman gave him twenty lashes
with his horsewhip.”

Despite these attacks, Baptist congregations multi-
plied.  By  1775,  about  15  percent  of  Virginia’s  whites
and  hundreds  of  enslaved  blacks  had  joined  Baptist

Baptism in the Schuylkill River

The Baptist movement, which made adult baptism central to its religious practice, gained enormous inﬂuence
during the Great Awakening. Baptists presented a challenge to the social order in New England, where Isaac
Backus and other leaders vigorously opposed the power of established Congregationalist churches. They
presented an even graver threat to established authority in Virginia, where they ministered to African
American slaves and ridiculed the pretensions of the gentry. This woodcut, from an eighteenth-century
history of the Baptist movement, shows a congregation gathered on the banks of the Schuylkill River in
Pennsylvania to witness the baptism of a new convert. Historical Society of Pennsylvania.

