CHAPTER 4

  Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763

135

churches. To signify their state of grace, some Baptist
men “cut off their hair, like Cromwell’s round-headed
chaplains.” Others forged a new evangelical masculin-
ity,  “crying,  weeping,  lifting  up  the  eyes,  groaning”
when touched by the Holy Spirit.

The  Baptist  revival  in  the  Chesapeake  challenged
customary authority in families and society but did not
overturn it. Rejecting the pleas of evangelical women,
Baptist men kept church authority in the hands of “free
born  male  members”;  and  Anglican  slaveholders  re-
tained control of the political system. Still, the Baptist
insurgency  infused  the  lives  of  poor  tenant  families
with  spiritual  meaning  and  empowered  yeomen  to
defend their economic interests. Moreover, as Baptist
ministers  spread  Christianity  among  slaves,  the  cul-
tural  gulf  between  blacks  and  whites  shrank,  under-
mining  one  justification  for  slavery  and  giving  some
blacks  a  new  religious  identity.  Within  a  generation,
African Americans would develop distinctive versions
of Protestant Christianity.

The Midcentury Challenge:
War, Trade, and Social
Conflict, 1750–1763
Between 1750 and 1763, three significant events trans-
formed colonial life. First, Britain went to war against
the French in America, sparking a worldwide conflict:
the  Great  War  for  Empire.  Second,  a  surge  in  trade
boosted  colonial consumption but caused Americans
to become deeply indebted to British creditors. Third,
westward  migration  sparked  warfare  with  Indian
peoples,  violent  disputes  between  settlers  and  land
speculators, and backcountry rebellions against eastern-
controlled governments.

The French and Indian War
In  1754,  overlapping  French  and  British  claims  in
North America came to a head (Map 4.4). The French
maintained their vast claims through a network of forts
and trading posts that sustained alliances with neigh-
boring  Indians.  The  soft  underbelly  of  this  sprawling
empire was the Ohio Valley, where French claims were
tenuous. Native peoples were driven out of the valley by
Iroquois  attacks  in  the  seventeenth  century,  but  after
1720  displaced  Indian  populations — especially  Dela-
wares  and  Shawnees  from  Pennsylvania — re settled
there  in  large  numbers.  In  the  1740s,  British  traders
from  Pennsylvania  began  traveling  down  the  Ohio

River. They traded with Delawares and Shawnees in the
upper valley and began to draw French-allied Indians
into their orbit and away from French posts. Then, in
1748, the Ohio Company of Virginia, a partnership of
prominent  colonial  planters  and  London  merchants,
received a 200,000-acre grant from the crown to estab-
lish a new settlement on the upper Ohio, threatening
French claims to the region.

Conflict in the Ohio Valley  By midcentury, Britain
relied  on  the  Iroquois  Confederacy  as  its  partner  in
Indian relations throughout the Northeast. By extend-
ing  the  Covenant  Chain,  the  Iroquois  had  become  a
kind of Indian empire in their own right, claiming to
speak for other groups throughout the region based on
their  seventeenth-century  conquests.  The  Delawares,
Shawnees, and other groups who repopulated the Ohio
Valley  did  so  in  part  to  escape  the  Iroquois  yoke.  To
maintain influence on the Ohio, the Iroquois sent two
“half-kings,”  Tanaghrisson  (an  adopted  Seneca)  and
Scarouady  (an  Oneida),  to  the  native  settlement  of
Logstown,  a  trading  town  on  the  upper  Ohio,  where
Britain recognized them as leaders.

French  authorities,  alarmed  by  British  inroads,
built a string of forts from Lake Erie to the headwaters
of the Ohio, culminating with Fort Duquesne on the
site  of  present-day  Pittsburgh.  To  reassert  British
claims, Governor Dinwiddie dispatched an expedition
led  by  Colonel  George  Washington,  a  twenty-two-
year-old  Virginian  whose  half-brothers  were  Ohio
Company  stockholders.  Washington  discovered  that
most of the Ohio Indians had decided to side with the
French; only the Iroquois half-kings and a few of their
followers  supported  his  efforts.  After  Washington’s
party  fired  on  a  French  detachment,  Tanaghrisson
rushed in and killed a French officer to ensure war — a
prospect  that  would  force  British  arms  to  support
Iroquois interests in the valley.

Washington’s  party  was  soon  defeated  by  a  larger
French force. The result was an international incident
that prompted Virginian and British expansionists to
demand war. But war in North America was a worri-
some prospect: the colonies were notoriously incapable
of cooperating in their own defense, and the Covenant
Chain was badly in need of repair.

The  Albany  Congress  The  Iroquois  Confederacy
was unhappy with its British alliance and believed that
the British were neglecting the Iroquois while settlers
from New York pressed onto their lands. Moreover, the
Ohio  Indians,  France,  and  Britain  were  all  acting  in
the  Ohio  Valley  without  consulting  them.  To  mend

