H u d s o n
B a y

CREE

H U D S O N’S BAY C

Y

N

A

P

M

O

L a b r a d o r
S e a

Ft. Louisbourg

Ft. Beauséjour

Quebec

MICMAC

ME.
(MASS.)

Port Royal

ASSINIBOINE

ALGONQUIN

Lake   Superior

Lake Huro

n

n
a
g
i
h
c
i
M

e
k
a
L

OTTAWA
Detroit

Lake Erie

DELAWARE
Ft. Duquesne

FOX

MIAMI

A

N

SHAWNEE

Ohio R.

CHEROKEE

N

A

R

F

W

Montreal

E

C

wrence R.

a

St. L

E

N

Ft. Frontenac

ABENAKI
Ft. Ticonderoga

N.H.

Ft. Oswego

L. Ontario
IROQUOIS

Ft. Stanwix

Albany

Boston

MASS.

R.I.
CONN.

N.Y.
A
C
I
R
E
M

New York

N.J.
Philadelphia

MD.
Ft. Cumberland

DEL.

Williamsburg

PENN.

T
R
O

OHIO
COMPANY
OF
VIRGINIA

H           A
BRITISH        N

N.C.

VA.

S.C.

MANDAN

ANISHINAABEG

CHEYENNE

SIOUX

Mississippi R.

PAWNEE

OSAGE

A

I

S

I

U

O

L

N

W

E

S

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

Santa Fe

COMANCHE

PUEBLO

WICHITA

CHICKASAW

CADDO

Natchez

CHOCTAW

New Orleans

G u l f   o f   M e x i c o

APACHE

N E W
S P A I N

San Antonio

Rio Gran

d
e

CATAWBA

GA.

CREEK

Charleston

Savannah

St. Augustine

SPANISH FLORIDA

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

French claims

British claims

Spanish claims

Disputed British-French claims

Disputed British-Spanish claims

Major fort

French outposts and settlements

Mexico City

MAP 4.4
European Spheres of Influence in North America, 1754

In the mid-eighteenth century, France, Spain, and the British-owned Hudson Bay Company laid
claim to the vast areas of North America still inhabited primarily by Indian peoples. British settlers
had already occupied much of the land east of the Appalachian Mountains. To safeguard their
lands west of the mountains, Native Americans played off one European power against another.
As a British ofﬁcial remarked: “To preserve the Ballance between us and the French is the great
ruling Principle of Modern Indian Politics.” When Britain expelled France from North America in
1763, Indians had to face encroaching Anglo-American settlers on their own.

136

