CHAPTER 4

  Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763

137

continental  assembly  to  manage  trade,  Indian  policy,
and the colonies’ defense. Though it was attractive to a
few reform-minded  colonists and administrators, the
plan  would  have  compromised  the  independence  of
colonial assemblies and the authority of Parliament. It
never received serious consideration, but that did not
stop the push toward war.

To see a longer excerpt of the Albany Plan of
Union, along with other primary sources from
this period, see Sources for America’s History.

The War Hawks Win
In Parliament, the fight for the
Ohio prompted a debate over war with France. Henry
Pelham, the British prime minister, urged calm: “There
is such a load of debt, and such heavy taxes already laid
upon the people, that nothing but an absolute neces-
sity can justifie our engaging in a  new War.” But two
expansionist-minded war hawks — rising British states-
man  William  Pitt  and  Lord  Halifax,  the  new  head  of
the Board of Trade — persuaded Pelham to launch an
American war. In June 1755, British and New England
troops  captured  Fort  Beauséjour  in  the  disputed
territory  of  Nova  Scotia  (which  the  French  called
Acadia).  Soldiers  from  Puritan  Massachusetts  then
forced nearly 10,000 French settlers from their lands,
arguing  they  were  “rebels”  without  property  rights,
and  deported  them  to  France,  the  West  Indies,
and  Louisiana  (where  “Acadians”  became  “Cajuns”).
English  and  Scottish  Protestants  took  over  the  farms
the French Catholics left behind.

This  Anglo-American  triumph  was  quickly  offset
by  a  stunning  defeat.  In  July  1755,  General  Edward
Braddock advanced on Fort Duquesne with a force of
1,500  British  regulars  and  Virginia  militiamen.
Braddock alienated potential allies by treating Indians
(including Tanaghrisson) dismissively and denying the
privilege  of  rank  to  colonial  officers  like  George
Washington. Persuaded that British arms could easily
triumph in the American backcountry, he was instead
routed  by  a  French  and  Indian  force.  Braddock  was
killed,  and  more  than  half  his  troops  were  killed  or
wounded.  “We  have  been  beaten,  most  shamefully
beaten,  by  a  handfull  of  Men,”  George  Washington
complained  bitterly  as  he  led  the  survivors  back  to
Virginia.

The Great War for Empire
By 1756, the American conflict had spread to Europe,
where it was known as the Seven Years’ War, and pitted
Britain and Prussia against France, Spain, and Austria.

Hendrick Peters Theyanoguin, Chief of the
Mohawks

Great Britain’s alliance with the Iroquois Confederacy —
the Covenant Chain — was central to its Indian policy in
the mid-eighteenth century, and the Mohawk warrior and
sachem Hendrick Peters Theyanoguin emerged as its most
powerful spokesman. His speech at the Albany Congress
of 1754, in which he urged Great Britain toward war, was
reported in newspapers in Britain and the colonies and made
him a transatlantic celebrity. This print was advertised for sale
in London bookstalls just as his death at the Battle of Lake
George (1755) was being reported in newspapers there.
Hendrick wears a rich silk waistcoat, an overcoat trimmed
with gold lace, a rufﬂed shirt, and a tricorn hat — gifts from
his British allies — while he holds a wampum belt in one
hand and a tomahawk in the other. Courtesy of the John Carter
Brown Library at Brown University.

relations with the Iroquois, the British Board of Trade
called a meeting at Albany in June 1754. There, a prom-
inent  Mohawk
leader  named  Hendrick  Peters
Theyanoguin challenged Britain to defend its interests
more vigorously, while Benjamin Franklin proposed a
“Plan of Union” among the colonies to counter French
expansion.

The  Albany  Plan  of  Union  proposed  that  “one
general government . . . be formed in America, includ-
ing  all  the  said  colonies.”  It  would  have  created  a

