138

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

Braddock’s Defeat and Death, July 1755

In May 1755 General Edward Braddock led a force of 1,500 British regulars and Virginia militiamen out of
Fort Cumberland in western Maryland, intending to oust the French from Fort Duquesne, 50 miles to the
west. As Braddock neared the fort, the French garrison of 200 troops and about 600 Indian allies — mostly
Potawatomis, Ottawas, Shawnees, and Delawares — set out to ambush his force. Instead, they unexpectedly
met the British along a narrow roadway. As the French and Indians fanned out to attack from the woods, the
British troops (George Washington reported) “were struck with such a panic that they behaved with more
cowardice than it is possible to conceive. The ofﬁcers behaved gallantly, in order to encourage their men, for
which they suffered greatly.” The British casualties — 450 killed, 500 wounded — included General Braddock,
pictured above, who later died from his wounds. © Chicago History Museum, USA/The Bridgeman Art Library.

When Britain mounted major offensives in India, West
Africa, and the West Indies as well as in North America,
the conflict became the Great War for Empire.

William Pitt emerged as the architect of the British
war  effort.  Pitt  was  a  committed  expansionist  with  a
touch of arrogance. “I know that I can save this country
and that I alone can,” he boasted. A master strategist,
he planned to cripple France by seizing its colonies. In
North  America,  he  enjoyed  a  decisive  demographic
advantage,  since  George  II’s  2  million  subjects  out-
numbered  the  French  14  to  1.  To  mobilize  the  colo-
nists, Pitt paid half the cost of their troops and supplied
them with arms and equipment, at a cost of £1 million
a year. He also committed a fleet of British ships and
30,000 British soldiers to the conflict in America.

Beginning in 1758, the powerful Anglo-American
forces  moved  from  one  triumph  to  the  next,  in  part
because they brought Indian allies back into the fold.
They  forced  the  French  to  abandon  Fort  Duquesne
(renamed Fort Pitt) and then captured Fort Louisbourg,
a stronghold at the mouth of the St. Lawrence. In 1759,
an  armada  led  by  British  general  James  Wolfe  sailed
down the St. Lawrence and took Quebec, the heart of
France’s American empire. The Royal Navy prevented
French  reinforcements  from  crossing  the  Atlantic,
allowing  British  forces  to  complete  the  conquest  of
Canada in 1760 by capturing Montreal (Map 4.5).

Elsewhere,  the  British  likewise  had  great  success.
From Spain, the British won Cuba and the Philippine
Islands. Fulfilling Pitt’s dream, the East India Company

