CHAPTER 4

  Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763

139

N E W   F R A N C E

ALGONQUIN

Ottawa R.

Quebec
Sept. 13, 1759

St. Lawrence R.

Montreal
Sept. 8, 1760

1760

Wolfe, 1758

St. John R.

Port
Royal

Ft. Frontenac
Aug. 27, 1758

Ft. Ticonderoga
July 8, 1758

Ft. Niagara
July 25, 1759

Lake Ontario

Ft. Oswego

IROQUOIS

Mohawk R.

Albany

1759

t R.

0
6
7
1
,
t
s
r
e
h
m
A

u
c
i
t
c
e
n
n
o
C

ABENAKI

Portsmouth

Amherst, 1758

La
k
e H

u
r
o
n

Gulf of
St. Lawrence

Cape
Breton
Island
Ft. Louisbourg
July 26, 1758

Ft. Beauséjour

MICMAC

ova  Scotia

N

Halifax

N

W

E

S

Lake Erie

DELAWARE

Allegheny R.

Ft. Duquesne
July 9, 1755
.
R
o
i
h
O
Ft. Necessity
July 3–4, 1754

SHAWNEE

BRITISH COLONIES

Philadelphia

D
e
l
a
w
a
r

e R.

Ft. Cumberland
Baltimore

Potomac R.

.

R
n
o
s
d
u
H

Boston

ATLANTIC OCEAN

New York

0

0

100

200 miles

100

200 kilometers

British movement
British victories
French victories
Fort
Settlement

MAP 4.5
The Anglo-American Conquest of New France

After full-scale war with France began in 1756, it took almost three years for the British ministry to
equip colonial forces and dispatch a sizable army to far-off America. In 1758, British and colonial
troops attacked the heartland of New France, capturing Quebec in 1759 and Montreal in 1760.
This conquest both united and divided the allies. Colonists celebrated the great victory: “The
Illuminations and Fireworks exceeded any that had been exhibited before,” reported the South
Carolina Gazette. However, British ofﬁcers had little respect for colonial soldiers. Said one, “[They
are] the dirtiest, most contemptible, cowardly dogs you can conceive.”

ousted  French  traders  from  India,  and  British  forces
seized French Senegal in West Africa. They also cap-
tured  the  rich  sugar  islands  of  Martinique  and
Guadeloupe in the French West Indies, but at the insis-
tence of the West Indian sugar lobby (which wanted to
protect  its  monopoly),  the  ministry  returned  the
islands to France in the Treaty of Paris of 1763. Despite
that  controversial  decision,  the  treaty  confirmed
Britain’s  triumph.  It  granted  Britain  sovereignty  over
half  of  North  America,  including  French  Canada,  all
French territory east of the Mississippi River, Spanish
Florida, and the recent conquests in Africa and India.
Britain had forged a commercial and colonial empire
that was nearly worldwide.

Though  Britain  had  won  cautious  support  from
some  Native  American  groups  in  the  late  stages  of
the  war,  its  territorial  acquisitions  alarmed  many
native peoples from New York to the Mississippi, who

preferred  the  presence  of  a  few  French  traders  to  an
influx  of  thousands  of  Anglo-American  settlers.  To
encourage  the  French  to  return,  the  Ottawa  chief
Pontiac  declared,  “I  am  French,  and  I  want  to  die
French.”  Neolin,  a  Delaware
prophet, went further, calling for
the expulsion of all white-skinned
invaders: “If you suffer the English
among  you,  you  are  dead  men.
their
Sickness,  smallpox,  and
poison  [rum]  will  destroy  you
entirely.”  In  1763,  inspired  by
Neolin’s nativist vision, Pontiac led a major uprising at
Detroit.  Following  his  example,  Indians  throughout
the  Great  Lakes  and  Ohio  Valley  seized  nearly  every
British military garrison west of Fort Niagara, besieged
Fort  Pitt,  and  killed  or  captured  more  than  2,000
settlers.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the Seven Years’
War reshape Britain’s
empire in North America
and affect native peoples?

