140

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

British military expeditions defeated the Delawares
near Fort Pitt and broke the siege of Detroit, but it took
the army nearly two years to reclaim all the posts it had
lost.  In  the  peace  settlement,  Pontiac  and  his  allies
accepted the British as their new political “fathers.” The
British ministry, having learned how expensive it was
to control the trans-Appalachian west, issued the Royal
Proclamation of 1763, which confirmed Indian control
of the region and declared it off-limits to colonial settle-
ment. It was an edict that many colonists would ignore.

British Industrial Growth
and the Consumer Revolution
Britain owed its military and diplomatic success to its
unprecedented economic resources. Since 1700, when
it  had  wrested  control  of  many  oceanic  trade  routes
from  the  Dutch,  Britain  had  become  the  dominant
commercial power in the Atlantic and Indian oceans.
By 1750, it was also becoming the first country to use
new manufacturing technology and work discipline to
expand  output.  This  combination  of  commerce  and
industry would soon make Britain the most powerful
nation in the world.

Mechanical  power  was  key  to  Britain’s  Industrial
Revolution.  British  artisans  designed  and  built  water
mills and steam engines that efficiently powered a wide
array  of  machines:  lathes  for  shaping  wood,  jennies
and looms for spinning and weaving textiles, and ham-
mers for forging iron. Compared with traditional man-
ufacturing methods, the new power-driven machinery
produced woolen and linen textiles, iron tools, furni-
ture,  and  chinaware  in  greater  quantities — and  at
lower  cost.  Moreover,  the  entrepreneurs  running  the
new  workshops  drove  their  employees  hard,  forcing
them to keep pace with the machines and work long
hours.  To  market  the  abundant  factory-produced
goods, English and Scottish merchants extended credit
to  colonial  shopkeepers  for  a  full  year  instead  of  the
traditional six months. Americans soon were purchas-
ing 30 percent of all British exports.

To  pay  for  British  manufactures,  mainland  colo-
nists  increased  their  exports  of  tobacco,  rice,  indigo,
and  wheat.  Using  credit  advanced  by  Scottish  mer-
chants,  planters  in  Virginia  bought  land,  slaves,  and
equipment
tobacco,
which  they  exported  to  expand-
ing markets in France and central
Europe.  In  South  Carolina,  rice
planters used British government
subsidies  to  develop  indigo  and
rice  plantations.  New  York,

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the prosperity of
the British Empire improve
and endanger the lives and
interests of colonists?

to  grow

Nicholas Boylston, c. 1769

Merchants in the coastal and transatlantic trades gained
enormous wealth in the mid-eighteenth century and
displayed it in new ways. Among the most ﬂamboyant was
Nicholas Boylston. Of Boylston’s home John Adams wrote, “A
Seat it is for a noble Man, a Prince.” In this portrait, painted
by John Singleton Copley in 1769, Boylston ﬂaunts his exotic
possessions. In place of the wig he would have worn outside
his home, Boylston wears a red velvet turban to keep his
shaved head warm. His morning gown of heavy silk damask
covers a rich waistcoat, casually unbuttoned in the middle to
reveal his elegant rufﬂed shirt. Boylston rests his left elbow on
two thick account books, an unmistakable reminder of the
source of his wealth. Photograph © 2014 Museum of Fine Arts,
Boston. Bequest of David P. Kimball, 23.504.

Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  and  Virginia  became  the
breadbasket of the Atlantic World, supplying Europe’s
exploding population with wheat.

Americans  used  their  profits  and  the  generous
credit extended from overseas to buy English manufac-
tures.  When  he  was  practicing  law  in  Boston,  John
Adams visited the home of Nicholas Boylston, one of
the city’s wealthiest merchants, “to view the Furniture,
which alone cost a thousand Pounds sterling,” he wrote.
“[T]he  Marble  Tables,  the  rich  Beds  with  Crimson
Damask  Curtains  and  Counterpins,  the  Beautiful
Chimny  Clock,  the  Spacious  Garden,  are  the  most
magnificent  of  any  Thing  I  have  ever  seen.”  Through
their  possessions,  well-to-do  colonists  set  themselves
apart from their humbler — or, as they might have said,
more vulgar — neighbors.

