CHAPTER 4

  Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763

141

Although  Britain’s  consumer  revolution  raised
living  standards,  it  landed  many  consumers — and
the  colonies  as  a  whole — in  debt  (Figure  4.4).  Even
during  the  wartime  boom  of  the  1750s,  exports  paid
for only 80 percent of British imports. Britain financed
the  remaining  20  percent — the  Americans’  trade
deficit — through  the  extension  of  credit  and  Pitt’s
military  expenditures.  When  the  military  subsidies
ended in 1763, the colonies fell into an economic reces-
sion. Merchants looked anxiously at their overstocked
warehouses and feared bankruptcy. “I think we have a
gloomy  prospect  before  us,”  a  Philadelphia  trader
noted in 1765. The increase in transatlantic trade had
made  Americans  more  dependent  on  overseas  credit
and markets.

The Struggle for Land in the East
In  good  times  and  bad,  the  population  continued  to
grow, intensifying the demand for arable land. Consider
the experience of Kent, Connecticut. Like earlier gen-
erations, Kent’s residents had moved inland to establish
new  farms,  but  Kent  stood  at  the  colony’s  western
boundary.  To  provide  for  the  next  generation,  many
Kent  families  joined  the  Susquehanna  Company
(1749),  which  speculated  in  lands  in  the  Wyoming
Valley  in  present-day  northeastern  Pennsylvania.  As
settlers took up farmsteads there, the company urged
the Connecticut legislature to claim the region on the

basis  of  Connecticut’s  “sea-to-sea”  royal  charter  of
1662.  However,  Charles  II  had  also  granted  the
Wyoming Valley to William Penn, and the Penn family
had sold farms there to Pennsylvania residents. By the
late 1750s, settlers from Connecticut and Pennsylvania
were  at  war,  burning  down  their  rivals’  houses  and
barns.  Delawares  with  their  own  claim  to  the  valley
were caught in the crossfire. In April 1763, the Delaware
headman  Teedyuscung  was  burned  to  death  in  his
cabin;  in  retaliation,  Teedyuscung’s  son  Captain  Bull
led  a  war  party  that  destroyed  a  community  of
Connecticut settlers.

Simultaneously, three distinct but related land dis-
putes broke out in the Hudson River Valley (Map 4.6).
Dutch tenant farmers, Wappinger Indians, and migrants
from Massachusetts asserted ownership rights to lands
long  claimed  by  manorial  families  such  as  the  Van
Rensselaers  and  the  Livingstons.  When  the  manor
lords turned to the legal system to uphold their claims,
Dutch and English farmers in Westchester, Dutchess,
and  Albany  counties  rioted  to  close  the  courts.  In
response,  New  York’s  royal  governor  ordered  British
troops to assist local sheriffs and manorial bailiffs: they
suppressed  the  tenant  uprisings,  intimidated  the
Wappingers, and evicted the Massachusetts squatters.
Other land disputes erupted in New Jersey and the
southern  colonies,  where  landlords  and  English  aris-
tocrats  had  successfully  revived  legal  claims  based
on  long-dormant  seventeenth-century  charters.  One

4.5 million

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0
1720

Population

British imports (in £)

Average yearly balance of payments, 1768–1772

Earnings

Payments

(£ sterling, millions)

Foreign earnings: Ship sales
Foreign earnings: Shipping
  British military expenditures

Commodities: Exports  2,870,000
140,000
820,000
365,000

Purchases of slaves & servants
Imperial government: Taxes

Commodities: Imports  3,920,000
280,000
 40,000

Total  4,195,000
  4,240,000

  Avg. annual Colonial deficit
Deficit over 5 years

45,000
225,000

Debt-fueled consumption

1730

1740

1750

1760

1770

1780

FIGURE 4.4
Mainland Population and British Imports

Around 1750, British imports were growing at a faster rate than the American population, indicat-
ing that the colonists were consuming more per capita. But Americans went into debt to pay for
these goods, running an annual trade deﬁcit with their British suppliers that by 1772 had created a
cumulative debt of £2 million.

