142

PART 2

  BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

MAINE
(MASS.)

N

VT.
(N.Y.)

ABENAKI
NEW
HAMP.

W

MASS.

CONN.

E

S

RHODE
ISLAND

Connecticut settlers
in Wyoming Valley

NEW
JERSEY

DEL.

New Jersey
land riots

Revival of charter
claims in Virginia
and North Carolina

ATLAN TIC
OC E AN

ALGONQUIN

Massachusetts settlers
in New York

L. H

u
r
o
n

L. Ontario

IROQUOIS

NEW YORK

New England migrants vs.
Hudson Valley manor lords

L. Erie

DELAWARE

Paxton Boys

SHAWNEE

Virginia speculators:
Ohio Company

PENNSYLVANIA

S
N
I
A
T
N
U
Y
O
E
L
L
M
A
H V
A
O
D
N

VIRGINIA

MARYLAND

NORTH
CAROLINA

N
A
I
H

SHENA
CHEROKEE

C

A

L

A

P

P

A

CATAWBA

SOUTH
CAROLINA

CREEK

GEORGIA

North Carolina
Regulators

Area of Settlement

Up to 1700
Up to 1750
Up to 1775

South Carolina
Regulators

0

0

150

300 miles

150

300 kilometers

MAP 4.6
Westward Expansion and Land Conflicts, 1750–1775

Between 1750 and 1775, the mainland colonial
population more than doubled — from 1.2 million
to 2.5 million — triggering westward migrations and
legal battles over land, which had become increasingly
valuable. Violence broke out in eastern areas, where
tenant farmers and smallholders contested landlords’
property claims based on ancient titles; and in the
backcountry, where migrating settlers fought with
Indians, rival claimants, and the ofﬁcials of eastern-
dominated governments.

court decision allowed Lord Granville, the heir of an
original  Carolina  proprietor,  to  collect  an  annual  tax
on land in North Carolina; another decision awarded
ownership  of  the  entire  northern  neck  of  Virginia
(along the Potomac River) to Lord Fairfax.

The revival of these proprietary claims by manorial
lords and English nobles testified to the rising value of
land along the Atlantic coastal plain. It also underscored
the  increasing  similarities  between  rural  societies  in
Europe and America. To avoid the status of European
peasants,  native-born  yeomen  and  tenant  families
joined the stream of European migrants searching for
cheap land near the Appalachian Mountains.

Western Rebels and Regulators
As  would-be  landowners  moved  west,  they  sparked
conflicts  over  Indian  policy,  political  representation,
and debts. During the war with France, Delaware and
Shawnee  warriors  had  exacted  revenge  for  Thomas
Penn’s land swindle of 1737 by destroying frontier farms
in  Pennsylvania  and  killing  hundreds  of  residents.
Scots-Irish  settlers  demanded  the  expulsion  of  all
Indians,  but  Quaker  leaders  refused.  So  in  1763,  a
group  of  Scots-Irish  frontiersmen  called  the  Paxton
Boys massacred twenty Conestoga Indians, an assimi-
lated community that had lived alongside their colonist
neighbors peacefully for many years. When Governor
John  Penn  tried  to  bring  the  murderers  to  justice,
250 armed Scots-Irishmen advanced on Philadelphia.
Benjamin  Franklin  intercepted  the  angry  mob  at
Lancaster and arranged a truce, averting a battle with
the militia. Prosecution of the Paxton Boys failed for
lack of witnesses, and the episode gave their defenders
the  opportunity  to  excoriate  Pennsylvania’s  govern-
ment  for  protecting  Indians  while  it  neglected  the
interests of backcountry colonists.

The South Carolina Regulators  Violence also broke
out in the backcountry of South Carolina, where land-
hungry Scottish and Anglo-American settlers clashed
repeatedly with Cherokees during the war with France.
After the fighting ended in 1763, a group of landown-
ing vigilantes known as the Regulators demanded that
the eastern-controlled government provide western dis-
tricts with more courts, fairer taxation, and greater rep-
resentation in the assembly. “We are Free-Men — British
Subjects — Not Born Slaves,” declared a Regulator mani-
festo. Fearing slave revolts, the lowland rice planters who
ran the South Carolina assembly compromised. In 1767,
the  assembly  created  western  courts  and  reduced  the
fees for legal documents; but it refused to reapportion
the legislature or lower western taxes. Like the Paxton
Boys  in  Pennsylvania,  the  South  Carolina  Regulators
won attention to backcountry needs but failed to wrest
power from the eastern elite.

Civil Strife in North Carolina
In 1766, a more rad-
ical  Regulator  movement  arose  in  North  Carolina.
When  the  economic  recession  of  the  early  1760s
brought  a  sharp  fall  in  tobacco  prices,  many  farmers
could not pay their debts. When creditors sued these
farmers for payment, judges directed sheriffs to seize
the debtors’ property. Many backcountry farmers lost
their  property  or  ended  up  in  jail  for  resisting  court
orders.

