To  save  their  farms,  North  Carolina’s  debtors
defied  the  government’s  authority.  Disciplined  mobs
intimidated  judges,  closed  courts,  and  freed  their
comrades from jail. The Regulators proposed a series
of  reforms,  including  lower  legal  fees  and  tax  pay-
ments in the “produce of the country” rather than in
cash.  They  also  demanded  greater  representation  in
the  assembly  and  a  just  revenue  system  that  would
tax  each  person  “in  proportion  to  the  profits  arising
from  his  estate.”  All  to  no  avail.  In  May  1771,  Royal
Governor  William  Tryon  mobilized  British  troops
and  the  eastern  militia,  which  defeated  a  large
Regulator  force  at  the  Alamance  River.  When  the
fighting ended, thirty men lay dead, and Tryon sum-
marily  executed  seven  insurgent  leaders.  Not  since
Bacon’s Rebellion in Virginia in 1675 and the colonial
uprisings during the Glorious Revolution of 1688 (see
Chapter  2)  had  a  colonial  dispute  caused  so  much
political agitation.

In  1771,  as  in  1675  and  1688,  colonial  conflicts
became linked with imperial politics. In Connecticut,
the Reverend Ezra Stiles defended the North Carolina
Regulators.  “What  shall  an  injured  &  oppressed
people do,” he asked, “[when faced with] Oppression
and tyranny?” Stiles’s remarks reflected growing resis-
tance to recently imposed British policies of taxation
and  control.  The  American  colonies  still  depended
primarily  on  Britain  for  their  trade  and  military
defense. However, by the 1760s, the mainland settle-
ments  had  evolved  into  complex  societies  with  the
potential to exist independently. British policies would

CHAPTER 4

  CHAPTER REVIEW

143

play  a  crucial  role  in  determining  the  direction  the
maturing colonies would take.

SUMMARY
In this chapter, we observed dramatic changes in Brit-
ish North America between 1720 and 1765. An aston-
ishing  surge  in  population — from  400,000  to  almost
2 million — was the combined result of natural increase,
European migration, and the African slave trade. The
print  revolution  and  the  rise  of  the  British  Atlantic
brought  important  new  influences:  the  European
Enlightenment and European Pietism transformed the
world of ideas, while a flood of British consumer goods
and  the  genteel  aspirations  of  wealthy  colonists
reshaped the colonies’ material culture.

Colonists

confronted

three  major

regional
challenges. In New England, crowded towns and ever-
smaller farms threatened the yeoman ideal of indepen-
dent farming, prompting families to limit births, move
to  the  frontier,  or  participate  in  an  “exchange”  econ-
omy. In the Middle Atlantic colonies, Dutch, English,
German,  and  Scots-Irish  residents  maintained  their
religious  and  cultural  identities  while  they  competed
for access to land and political power. Across the back-
country, new interest in western lands triggered con-
flicts  with  Indian  peoples,  civil unrest  among  whites,
and, ultimately, the Great War for Empire. In the after-
math  of  the  fighting,  Britain  stood  triumphant  in
Europe and America.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

tenancy (p. 116)
competency (p. 117)
household mode of production

(p. 120)

squatters (p. 121)
redemptioner (p. 124)
Enlightenment (p. 126)
Pietism (p. 126)

natural rights (p. 127)
deism (p. 128)
revival (p. 129)
Old Lights (p. 132)
New Lights (p. 132)
consumer revolution (p. 141)
Regulators (p. 142)

Key People

Isaac Newton (p. 127)
John Locke (p. 127)
Benjamin Franklin (p. 128)
Jonathan Edwards (p. 129)
George Whitefield (p. 129)
Tanaghrisson (p. 135)
William Pitt (p. 138)
Pontiac (p. 139)

