144

PART 2

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  Compare colonists’ “pursuits of happiness” in New
England,  the  Middle  colonies,  the  backcountry,
and the South. How did poorer colonists in each of
these  regions  seek  to  maintain  their  autonomy
from powerful landlords and institutions, and how
did  this  effort  shape  the  formation  of  regional
identities?

2.  How did the print and transportation revolutions
transform colonial culture and the economy in the
eighteenth century?

3.  The  Great  War  for  Empire  delivered  the  eastern
half of North America into British hands. How did
that massive territorial acquisition affect ordinary
colonists?  What  impact  did  it  have  on  Native
Americans’  strategies  for  coexisting  with  their
European neighbors?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events  listed  under  “Work,  Exchange,  and  Tech-
nology”  and  “Identity”  for  the  period  1720–1750
on the thematic timeline on page 79. How did eco-
nomic developments in the colonies influence the
formation of new cultural identities in this era?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS TIME AND PLACE  In Chapter 3 we
saw the rise of the South Atlantic System, an engine
of  economic  growth  that  tied  Britain’s  colonies
more  closely  together  and  generated  prosperity
throughout the British Atlantic world. What conse-
quences of that integration and prosperity are evi-
dent in the topics discussed in this chapter? How
was the Great War for Empire grounded in earlier
economic developments? And how did the postwar
debt crisis grow out of the South Atlantic System?

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  Return to the John Collet
painting  of  George  Whitefield  that  opened  the
chapter  (p.  115).  How  does  Collet  portray
Whitefield’s  audience?  Consider  the  postures  and
facial  expressions  of  individual  members  of  the
crowd and imagine what might have been running
through their minds as they listened. What do the
various elements of this painting (the crowd, tan-
kard of ale, sleeping dog, setting) suggest about the
Great Awakening’s appeal? About Collet’s attitude
toward evangelical preaching?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Fred Anderson, The War That Made America
(2005). A compelling narrative of the Seven Years’
War in America. Also see The War That Made
America (PBS video) and its Web site:
thewarthatmadeamerica.org.

Colin G. Calloway, White People, Indians, and
Highlanders (2008). Makes suggestive comparisons
between Britain’s encounters in Scotland and
America.

Aaron Spencer Fogleman, Hopeful Journeys (1996).
Covers German migrations to America.

Patrick Griffin, The People with No Name (2001).
Treats the experience of the Scots-Irish in Ireland
and America.

Susan E. Klepp and Billy G. Smith, eds., The Infortu-
nate (1992). A compelling narrative of one indentured
servant immigrant’s experience in the Middle
colonies.

Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, A Midwife’s Tale (1990). A
vivid account of one woman’s experiences on the
Maine frontier. See also A Midwife’s Tale (PBS video)
and two related Web sites: pbs.org/wgbh/amex
/midwife and DoHistory.org.

