From British North America to
the United States of America

After violently rejecting attempts to reform the British
Empire, the Patriots won independence and began
constructing republican governments. Their experi-
ments extended across an entire generation, and it
took still longer to decide how much power the
federal republic should wield over the states. The
political culture spawned by the Revolution was
similarly unformed and slow to develop. Political
parties, for example, were unanticipated by the
founders and, at ﬁrst, widely regarded as illegitimate.
However, by 1820, they had become central to the
adjudication of political conﬂict, heightening some
forms of competition while blunting others. The United
States also fought wars with Native Americans in the
trans-Appalachian west to gain new territory, and with
Great Britain to ensure its independence. Across three
generations, American political culture was trans-
formed, national borders were secured, and republican
national and state governments commanded the
allegiance of their citizens.

Challenges to the Social Order

As Patriots articulated values they associated with
independence, they aligned their movement with
currents of reform eddying through the Atlantic World:
antislavery; women’s rights; religious liberty; social
equality. Each of these ideas was controversial, and
the American Revolution endorsed none of them in an
unqualiﬁed way. But its idealism — the sense that the
Revolution marked “a memorable epoch in the annals
of the human race,” as John Adams put it — made the
era malleable and full of possibility.

Legislatures abolished slavery in the North,

broadened religious liberty by allowing freedom of
conscience, and, except in New England, ended the
system of legally established churches. Postwar evan-
gelicalism gave enormous energy to a new wave of
innovative religious developments. However, Americans
continued to argue over social equality, in part because
their republican creed placed family authority in the
hands of men and political power in the hands of
propertied individuals: this arrangement denied power
and status not only to slaves but also to free blacks,
women, and middling and poor white men. Though
the Revolution’s legacy was mixed, its meaning would
be debated for decades in American public life.

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

147

