Revolution and
Republican Culture
1763–1820

Thematic Understanding

This timeline arranges some of the important

events of this period into themes. Consider

the items listed under the theme “Ideas,

Beliefs, and Culture.” How did the American

Revolution challenge existing social arrange-

ments? Consider the role of religion in

American life, the status of women, and the

institution of slavery. What tensions developed

as a result of those challenges?  >

Conquest, Competition,
and Consolidation

One uncontested value of the Revolutionary era was a
commitment to economic opportunity. To achieve this,
people migrated in large numbers, and the United
States dramatically expanded its boundaries: ﬁrst, by
conquest, pushing west to the Mississippi River; then,
by purchase, all the way to the Paciﬁc Ocean. Northern
merchants created a banking system and organized
rural manufacturing. State governments used charters
and other privileges to assist businesses and to improve
infrastructure. Southern planters used slaves to grow a
new staple crop — cotton. Many yeomen farm families
moved west to farm; and Eastern laborers worked in
burgeoning manufacturing enterprises. By 1820, the
young American republic was on the verge of achiev-
ing economic as well as political independence.

Even as the borders of the United States expanded,
its diversity inhibited the effort to deﬁne an American
culture and identity. Native Americans still lived in their
own clans and nations; black Americans were develop-
ing a distinct African American culture; and White
Americans were enmeshed in vigorous regional
ethnic communities. Over time, political institutions
began to unite Americans of diverse backgrounds,
as did increasing participation in the market economy
and in evangelical Protestant churches. By 1820, to be
an American meant, for many members of the domi-
nant white population, to be a republican, a Protestant,
and an enterprising individual.

148

