The Problem of Empire
1763–1776

In  June  1775,  the  city  of  New  York

IDENTIF Y THE BIG IDEA
Consider  whether  the  collapse  of
in  the  thirteen
British  authority
rebellious
colonies  might  have
been  avoided  through  compromise
measures  and  more  astute  leader-
independence
ship.  Was  colonial
inevitable,  and  was  war  the  only
way to achieve it?

faced  a  perplexing  dilemma.  Word
arrived that George Washington, who
had just been named commander in chief
of  the  newly  formed  Continental  army,
was  coming  to  town.  But  on  the  same
day,  William  Tryon,  the  colony’s  crown-
appointed  governor,  was  scheduled  to
return  from  Britain.  Local  leaders  orches-
trated  a  delicate  dance.  Though  the  Pro-
vincial  Congress  was  operating  illegally  in  the  eyes  of  the  crown,  it  did  not  wish  to
offend Governor Tryon. It instructed the city’s newly raised volunteer battalion to divide
in two. One company awaited Washington’s arrival, while another prepared to greet the
governor. The “residue of the Battalion” was to be “ready to receive either the General
or Governour Tryon, which ever shall ﬁrst arrive.” Washington arrived ﬁrst. He was met
by nine companies of the volunteer battalion and a throng of well-wishers, who escorted
him to his rooms in a local tavern. Many of this same crowd then crossed town to join
the  large  group  assembled  to  greet  the  governor,  whose  ship  was  just  landing.  The
crowd met him with “universal shouts of applause” and accompanied him home.

This awkward moment in the history of one American city reﬂects a larger crisis of
loyalty that plagued colonists throughout British North America in the years between
1763 and 1776. The outcome of the Great War for Empire left Great Britain the undis-
puted master of eastern North America. But that success pointed the way to catastro-
phe. Convinced of the need to reform the empire and tighten its administration, British
policymakers imposed a series of new administrative measures on the colonies. Accus-
tomed  as  they  were  to  governing  their  own  affairs,  colonists  could  not  accept  these
changes. Yet the bonds of loyalty were strong, and the unraveling of British authority
was  tortuous  and  complex.  Only  gradually — as  militancy  slowly  mounted  on  both
sides — were the ties of empire broken and independence declared.

5

C H A P T E R

AN EMPIRE
TRANSFORMED
The Costs of Empire

George Grenville and the Reform

Impulse

An Open Challenge: The

Stamp Act

THE DYNAMICS OF
REBELLION, 1765–1770

Formal Protests and the Politics

of the Crowd

The Ideological Roots of

Resistance

Another Kind of Freedom

Parliament and Patriots Square

Off Again

The Problem of the West

Parliament Wavers

THE ROAD TO
INDEPENDENCE,
1771–1776

A Compromise Repudiated

The Continental Congress

Responds

The Rising of the Countryside

Loyalists and Neutrals

VIOLENCE EAST
AND WEST

Lord Dunmore’s War

Armed Resistance in
Massachusetts

The Second Continental

Congress Organizes for War

Thomas Paine’s Common Sense

Independence Declared

150

