152

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

An Empire Transformed
The Great War for Empire of 1756–1763  (Chapter 4)
transformed the British Empire in North America. The
British ministry could no longer let the colonies man-
age their own affairs while it contented itself with min-
imal  oversight  of  the  Atlantic  trade.  Its  interests  and
responsibilities now extended far into the continental
interior — a much more costly and complicated propo-
sition  than  it  had  ever  faced  before.  And  neither  its
American colonies nor their Native American neigh-
bors were inclined to cooperate in the transformation.
British administrators worried about their Ameri-
can colonists, who, according to former Georgia gover-
nor  Henry  Ellis,  felt  themselves  “entitled  to  a  greater
measure  of  Liberty  than  is  enjoyed  by  the  people  of
England.” Ireland had been closely ruled for decades,
and  recently
India
Company  set  up  dominion  over
millions  of  non-British  peoples
(Map 5.1 and America Compared,
p.  153).  Britain’s  American  pos-
sessions  were  likewise  filled  with
aliens and “undesirables”: “French,
innumerable,
Dutch,  Germans
Indians, Africans, and a multitude of felons from this
country,”  as  one  member  of  Parliament  put  it.  Con-
sequently,  declared  Lord  Halifax,  “The  people  of
England” considered Americans “as foreigners.”

the  East

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What was the impact of
the Great War for Empire
on British policymakers
and the colonies?

Contesting that status, wealthy Philadelphia lawyer
John  Dickinson  argued  that  his  fellow  colonists  were
“not [East Indian] Sea Poys, nor Marattas, but British
subjects who are born to liberty, who know its worth,
and  who  prize  it  high.”  Thus  was  the  stage  set  for  a
struggle  between  the  conceptions  of  identity — and
empire — held  by  British  ministers,  on  the  one  hand,
and many American colonists on the other.

The Costs of Empire
The Great War for Empire imposed enormous costs on
Great Britain. The national debt soared from £75 mil-
lion  to  £133  million  and  was,  an  observer  noted,
“becoming  the  alarming  object  of  every  British  sub-
ject.” By war’s end, interest on the debt alone consumed
60 percent of the nation’s budget, and the ministry had
to  raise  taxes.  During  the  eighteenth  century,  taxes
were  shifting  from  land — owned  by  the  gentry  and
aristocracy — to  consumables,  and  successive  minis-
tries became ever more ingenious in devising new ways
to raise money. Excise (or sales) taxes were levied on all

kinds  of  ordinary  goods — salt  and  beer,  bricks  and
candles, paper (in the form of a stamp tax) — that were
consumed by middling and poor Britons. In the 1760s,
the per capita tax burden was 20 percent of income.

To  collect  the  taxes,  the  government  doubled  the
size  of  the  tax  bureaucracy  (Figure  5.1).  Customs
agents patrolled the coasts of southern Britain, seizing
tons  of  contraband  French  wines,  Dutch  tea,  and
Flemish  textiles.  Convicted  smugglers  faced  heavy
penalties, including death or forced “transportation” to
America as indentured servants. (Despite colonial pro-
tests,  nearly  fifty  thousand  English  criminals  had
already been shipped to America to be sold as inden-
tured servants.)

The  price  of  empire  abroad  was  thus  larger  gov-
ernment  and  higher  taxes  at  home.  Members  of  two
British opposition parties, the Radical Whigs and the
Country  Party,  complained  that  the  huge  war  debt
placed  the  nation  at  the  mercy  of  the  “monied  inter-
ests,” the banks and financiers who reaped millions of
pounds’  interest  from  government  bonds.  To  reverse
the growth of government and the threat to personal
liberty and property rights, British reformers demanded
that  Parliament  represent  a  broader  spectrum  of
the  property-owning  classes.  The  Radical  Whig  John
Wilkes condemned rotten boroughs — sparsely popu-
lated,  aristocratic-controlled  electoral  districts — and
demanded greater representation for rapidly growing
commercial  and  manufacturing  cities.  The  war  thus
transformed British politics.

The  war  also  revealed  how  little  power  Britain
wielded in its American colonies. In theory, royal gov-
ernors had extensive political powers, including com-
mand of the provincial militia; in reality, they shared
power  with  the  colonial  assemblies,  which  outraged
British officials. The Board of Trade complained that in
Massachusetts “almost every act of executive and leg-
islative  power  is  ordered  and  directed  by  votes  and
resolves of the General Court.” To enforce the collec-
tion  of  trade  duties,  which  colonial  merchants  had
evaded  for  decades  by  bribing  customs  officials,
Parliament passed the Revenue Act of 1762. The min-
istry also instructed the Royal Navy to seize American
vessels carrying food crops from the mainland colo-
nies to the French West Indies. It was absurd, declared
a British politician, that French armies attempting “to
Destroy  one  English  province . . . are  actually  sup-
ported by Bread raised in another.”

Britain’s  military  victory  brought  another  funda-
mental shift in policy: a new peacetime deployment of
15  royal  battalions — some  7,500  troops — in  North

