FIGURE 5.1
The Cost of Empire, 1690–1790

It cost money to build and maintain an empire. As
Britain built a great navy, subsidized the armies of
European allies, and fought four wars against France
and Spain between 1702 and 1783, military expendi-
tures soared. Tax revenues did not keep pace, so the
government created a large national debt by issuing
bonds for millions of pounds. This policy created a
class of wealthy ﬁnanciers, led to political protests,
and eventually prompted attempts to tax the
American colonists.

CHAPTER 5

  The Problem of Empire, 1763–1776

155

Military spending
Civil spending

Net tax income
(£ sterling, millions)

American War
of Independence,
1775–1783

War of the
Spanish
Succession,
1702–1713

Seven
Years’ War,
1756–1763

War of the
Austrian
Succession,
1740–1748

1700

1710

1720

1730

1740

1750

1760

1770

1780

1790

30

20

10

0
1690

now  that  they  no  longer  faced  a  threat  from  French
Canada.

The  cost  of  stationing  these  troops,  estimated  at
£225,000  per  year,  compounded  Britain’s  fiscal  crisis,
and it seemed clear that the burden had to be shared by
the  colonies.  They  had  always  managed  their  own
finances, but the king’s ministers agreed that Parliament
could no longer let them off the hook for the costs of
empire. The greatest gains from the war had come in
North America, where the specter of French encircle-
ment had finally been lifted, and the greatest new post-
war  expenses  were  being  incurred  in North  America
as well.

George Grenville and the
Reform Impulse
The challenge of raising revenue from the colonies fell
first  to  George  Grenville.  Widely  regarded  as  “one  of
the ablest men in Great Britain,” Grenville understood
the  need  for  far-reaching  imperial  reform.  He  first
passed  the  Currency  Act  of  1764,  which  banned  the
American  colonies  from  using  paper  money  as  legal
tender.  Colonial  shopkeepers,  planters,  and  farmers
had  used  local  currency,  which  was  worth  less  than
British  pounds  sterling,  to  pay  their  debts  to  British
merchants. The Currency Act ensured that merchants
would no longer be paid in money printed in the colo-
nies, boosting their profits and British wealth.

The  Sugar  Act  Grenville  also  won  parliamentary
approval of the Sugar Act of 1764 to replace the widely
ignored Molasses Act of 1733 (see Chapter 3). The ear-
lier act had set a tax rate of 6 pence per gallon on French
molasses — a rate so high that it made the trade unprof-
itable.  Rather  than  pay  it,  colonial  merchants  bribed
customs officials at the going rate of 1.5 pence per gal-
lon. Grenville settled on a duty of 3 pence per gallon,
which merchants could pay and still turn a profit, and
then  tightened  customs  enforcement  so  that  it  could
actually be collected.

This carefully crafted policy garnered little support
in America. New England merchants, among them John
Hancock  of  Boston,  had  made  their  fortunes  smug-
gling French molasses. In 1754, Boston merchants paid
customs duties on a mere 400 hogsheads of molasses,
yet  they  imported  40,000  hogsheads  for  use  by  63
Massachusetts rum distilleries. Publicly, the merchants
claimed  that  the  Sugar  Act  would  ruin  the  distilling
industry;  privately,  they  vowed  to  evade  the  duty  by
smuggling or by bribing officials.

The End of Salutary Neglect  More important, col-
onists raised constitutional objections to the Sugar Act.
In  Massachusetts,  the  leader  of  the  assembly  argued
that the new legislation was “contrary to a fundamental
Principall of our Constitution: That all Taxes ought to
originate with the people.” In Rhode Island, Governor
Stephen  Hopkins  warned:  “They  who  are  taxed  at

