156

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

Hudson
Bay

HUDSON'S BAY COMPANY

QUEBEC

The Treaty of Paris allowed the
British-run Hudson’s Bay Company
to expand its territory and influence.

Newfoundland

Nova
Scotia

MAINE
(part of
Mass.)
N.H.

MASS.

M

S P A N I S H
L O U I S I A N A

Britain gained much more
American territory from
the Treaty of Paris (1763)
than it had from the Treaty
of Utrecht (1713). The new
treaty gave Britain control
of Spanish Florida and all of
New France east of the
Mississippi River.

Gulf of Mexico

R.I.
CONN.

N.J.
DEL.

N.Y.

PENN.

MD.

VA.

e

Proclamation  Lin

S.C.

N.C.

GA.

FLORIDA

BAHAMAS (Br.)

CUBA
(Sp.)

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

British Colonies: Comparisons
Proprietary

Corporate

Royal

Population
White       Black
(in 1770)

Average Annual
Exports
(in 1770)

Exports
per White
 (shillings)*

West Indian islands
Southern mainland
Northern mainland

40,000
600,000
1,092,000

330,000
394,000
45,000

£1,856,000
£1,703,776
£1,105,376

928s.
57s.
21s.

*20 shillings = £1 (one English pound);  £1 = about $400 in 2010 prices.

BELIZE

JAMAICA
(Br.)

ST. DOMINIQUE
(Fr.)

Puerto
Rico
(Sp.)

C a r i b b e a n   S e a

SANTO DOMINGO
(Sp.)

Guadeloupe
(Fr.)

Martinique
(Fr.)

Barbados
(Br.)

N

W

E

S

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

In 1763, West Indian sugar was still Britain’s primary colonial
export crop, but its value was now less than the combined worth of
the tobacco, rice, and flour exported from the mainland colonies.

MAP 5.2
Britain’s American Empire in 1763

The Treaty of Paris gave Britain control of the eastern half of North America and returned a
few captured sugar islands in the West Indies to France. To protect the empire’s new mainland
territories, British ministers dispatched troops to Florida and Quebec. They also sent troops to
uphold the terms of the Proclamation of 1763, which prohibited Anglo-American settlement
west of the Appalachian Mountains.

pleasure by others cannot possibly have any property,
and they who have no property, can have no freedom.”
The Sugar Act raised other constitutional issues as well.
Merchants prosecuted under the act would be tried in
vice-admiralty  courts,  tribunals  governing  the  high
seas  and  run  by  British-appointed  judges.  Previously,
merchants accused of Navigation Acts violations were
tried  by  local  common-law  courts,  where  friendly
juries often acquitted them. The Sugar Act closed this
legal loophole by extending the jurisdiction of the vice-
admiralty courts to all customs offenses.

The  Sugar  Act  revived  old  American  fears.  The
influential Virginia planter Richard Bland emphasized
that  the  American  colonists  “were  not  sent  out  to  be
the Slaves but to be the Equals of those that remained
behind.” John Adams, the young Massachusetts lawyer
defending  John  Hancock  on  a  charge  of  smuggling,

To see a longer excerpt of the Richard Bland
document, along with other primary sources from
this period, see Sources for America’s History.

