argued that the vice-admiralty courts diminished this
equality by “degrad[ing] every American . . . below the
rank of an Englishman.”

In fact, accused smugglers in Britain were also tried
in vice-admiralty courts, so there was no discrimina-
tion against Americans. The real issue was the growing
power  of  the  British  state.  Americans  had  lived  for
decades  under  an  administrative  policy  of  salutary
neglect.  Now  they  saw  that  the  new  imperial  regime
would  deprive  them  “of  some  of  their  most  essential
Rights as British subjects,” as a committee of the Mass-
achusetts assembly put it. In response, Royal Governor
Francis Bernard replied: “The rule that a British subject
shall not be bound by laws or liable to taxes, but what
he  has  consented  to  by  his  representatives  must  be
confined to the inhabitants of Great Britain only.” To
Bernard,  Grenville,  and  other  imperial  reformers,
Americans were second-class subjects of the king, with
rights  limited  by  the  Navigation  Acts,  parliamentary
laws, and British interests.

An Open Challenge: The Stamp Act
Another  new  tax,  the  Stamp  Act  of  1765,  sparked
the  first  great  imperial  crisis.  The  new  levy  was  to
cover  part  of  the  cost  of  keeping  British  troops  in
America — which  turned  out  to  be  £385,000  a  year
(about $150 million today), 70 percent more than the
initial estimate. Grenville hoped the Stamp Act would
raise  £60,000  per  year.  The  act  would  require  a  tax
stamp  on  all  printed  items,  from  college  diplomas,
court  documents,  land  titles,  and  contracts  to  news-
papers, almanacs, and playing cards. It was ingeniously
designed. Like its counterpart in England, it bore more
heavily  on  the  rich,  since  it  charged  only  a  penny  a
sheet for newspapers and other common items but up
to  £10  for  a  lawyer’s  license.  It  also  required  no  new
bureaucracy;  stamped  paper  would  be  delivered  to
colonial ports and sold to printers in lieu of unstamped
stock.

Benjamin  Franklin,  agent  of  the  Pennsylvania
assembly,  proposed  a  different  solution:  American
representation in Parliament. “If you chuse to tax us,”
he wrote, “give us Members in your Legislature, and let
us be one People.” With the exception of William Pitt,
British politicians rejected Franklin’s idea as too radi-
cal. They argued that the colonists already had virtual
representation  in  Parliament  because  some  of  its
members were transatlantic merchants and West Indian
sugar planters. Colonial leaders were equally skeptical
of  Franklin’s  plan.  Americans  were  “situate  at  a  great
Distance from their Mother Country,” the Connecticut

CHAPTER 5

  The Problem of Empire, 1763–1776

157

assembly declared, and therefore “cannot participate in
the general Legislature of the Nation.”

Asserting “the Right of Parliament to lay an inter-
nal  Tax  upon  the  Colonies,”  the  House  of  Commons
ignored American opposition and
passed the act by an overwhelm-
ing  majority  of  205  to  49.  At
the  request  of  General  Thomas
Gage,  the  British  military  com-
mander  in  America,  Parliament
also  passed  the  Quartering  Act
of  1765,  which  required  colonial
governments to provide barracks
and food for British troops. Finally, Parliament approved
Grenville’s proposal that violations of the Stamp Act be
tried in vice-admiralty courts.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Why did most British and
colonial leaders reject
the idea that the colonies
should be represented in
Parliament?

Using  the  doctrine  of  parliamentary  supremacy,
Grenville had begun to fashion a centralized imperial
system in America much like that already in place in
Ireland: British officials would govern the colonies with
little regard for the local assemblies. Consequently, the
prime  minister’s  plan  provoked  a  constitutional  con-
frontation on the specific issues of taxation, jury trials,
and military quartering as well as on the general ques-
tion of representative self-government.

The Dynamics of Rebellion,
1765–1770
In the name of reform, Grenville had thrown down the
gauntlet  to  the  Americans.  The  colonists  had  often
resisted unpopular laws and aggressive governors, but
they  had  faced  an  all-out  attack  on  their  institutions
only once before — in 1686, when James II had unilat-
erally  imposed  the  Dominion  of  New  England.  Now
the  danger  to  colonial  autonomy  was  even  greater
because both the king and Parliament backed reform.
But  the  Patriots,  as  the  defenders  of  American  rights
came to be called, met the challenge posed by Grenville
and his successor, Charles Townshend. They organized
protests — formal  and  informal,  violent  as  well  as
peaceful — and  fashioned  a  compelling  ideology  of
resistance.

Formal Protests and the Politics
of the Crowd
Virginia’s House of Burgesses was the first formal body
to  complain.  In  May  1765,  hotheaded  young  Patrick
Henry denounced Grenville’s legislation and attacked

