158

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

Protesting the Stamp
Act in Portsmouth, New
Hampshire

Throughout the colonies,
disciplined mobs protesting
the Stamp Act forced stamp
distributors to resign their
ofﬁces. In this engraving,
protesters in the small city of
Portsmouth, New Hampshire,
stone an efﬁgy of the distributor
as other members of the mob
carry off a cofﬁn representing
the death of American “Liberty.”
Illustration from “Interesting Events
in the History of the U.S.” by J. W.
Barber, 1829/Picture Research
Consultants & Archives.

George III for supporting it. He compared the king to
Charles I, whose tyranny had led to his overthrow and
execution in the 1640s. These remarks, which bordered
on treason, frightened the Burgesses; nonetheless, they
condemned  the  Stamp  Act’s  “manifest  Tendency  to
Destroy American freedom.” In Massachusetts, James
Otis, another republican-minded firebrand, persuaded
the House of Representatives to call a meeting of all the
mainland colonies “to implore Relief ” from the act.

The Stamp Act Congress  Nine assemblies sent del-
egates to the Stamp Act Congress, which met in New
York City in October 1765. The congress protested the
loss  of  American  “rights  and  liberties,”  especially  the
right  to  trial  by  jury.  And  it  challenged  the  constitu-
tionality of both the Stamp and Sugar Acts by declaring
that  only  the  colonists’  elected  representatives  could
tax them. Still, moderate-minded delegates wanted com-
promise,  not  confrontation.  They  assured  Parliament
that  Americans  “glory  in  being  subjects  of  the  best
of  Kings”  and  humbly  petitioned  for  repeal  of  the
Stamp Act. Other influential Americans favored active
(but peaceful) resistance; they organized a boycott of
British goods.

Crowd  Actions  Popular  opposition  also  took  a
violent  form,  however.  When  the  Stamp  Act  went
into effect on November 1, 1765,
disciplined  mobs  demanded  the
resignation  of  stamp-tax  collec-
tors.  In  Boston,  a  group  calling
itself  the  Sons  of  Liberty  burned
an  effigy  of  collector  Andrew

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
Why did the Stamp Act
arouse so much more resis-
tance than the Sugar Act?

Oliver  and  then  destroyed  Oliver’s  new  brick  ware-
house. Two weeks later, Boston ians attacked the house
of Lieutenant Governor Thomas Hutchinson, Oliver’s
brother-in-law and a prominent defender of imperial
authority, breaking his furniture, looting his wine cel-
lar, and setting fire to his library.

Wealthy  merchants  and  Patriot  lawyers,  such  as
John  Hancock  and  John  Adams,  encouraged  the
mobs,  which  were  usually  led  by  middling  artisans
and minor merchants. In New York City, nearly three
thousand shopkeepers, artisans, laborers, and seamen
marched  through  the  streets  breaking  windows  and
crying  “Liberty!”  Resistance  to  the  Stamp  Act  spread
far  beyond  the  port  cities:  in  nearly  every  colony,
angry  crowds — the  “rabble,”  their  detractors  called
them — intimidated royal officials. Near Wethersfield,
Connecticut, five hundred farmers seized tax collector
Jared  Ingersoll  and  forced  him  to  resign  his  office  in
“the Cause of the People.”

The  Motives  of  the  Crowd  Such  crowd  actions
were common in both Britain and America, and pro-
testers  had  many  motives.  Roused  by  the  Great
Awakening,  evangelical  Protestants  resented  arrogant
British military officers and corrupt royal bureaucrats.
In  New  England,  where  rioters  invoked  the  anti-
monarchy  sentiments  of  their  great-grandparents,  an
anonymous letter sent to a Boston newspaper promis-
ing  to  save  “all  the  Freeborn  Sons  of  America”  was
signed “Oliver Cromwell,” the English republican revo-
lutionary  of  the  1650s.  In  New  York  City,  Sons  of
Liberty leaders Isaac Sears and Alexander McDougall
were minor merchants and Radical Whigs who feared

