that  imperial  reform  would  undermine  political  lib-
erty. The mobs also included apprentices, day laborers,
and  unemployed  sailors:  young  men  with  their  own
notions  of  liberty  who — especially  if  they  had  been
drinking — were quick to resort to violence.

Nearly everywhere popular resistance nullified the
Stamp  Act.  Fearing  an  assault  on  Fort  George,  New
York  lieutenant  governor  Cadwallader  Colden  called
on  General  Gage  to  use  his  small  military  force  to
protect the stamps. Gage refused. “Fire from the Fort
might  disperse  the  Mob,  but  it  would  not  quell
them,”  he  told  Colden,  and  the  result  would  be  “an
Insurrection,  the  Commencement  of  Civil  War.”  The
tax was collected in Barbados and Jamaica, but fright-
ened  collectors  resigned  their  offices  in  all  thirteen
colonies that would eventually join in the Declaration
of  Independence.  This  popular  insurrection  gave  a
democratic  cast  to  the  emerging  Patriot  movement.
“Nothing is wanting but your own Resolution,” declared
a New York rioter, “for great is the Authority and Power
of the People.”

The Ideological Roots of Resistance
Some  Americans  couched  their  resistance  in  consti-
tutional  terms.  Many  were  lawyers  or  well-educated
merchants  and  planters.  Composing  pamphlets  of
remarkable political sophistication, they gave the resis-
tance movement its rationale, its political agenda, and
its leaders.

Patriot writers drew on three intellectual traditions.
The  first  was  English  common  law,  the  centuries-old
body of legal rules and procedures that protected the
lives  and  property  of  the  monarch’s  subjects.  In  the
famous Writs of Assistance case of 1761, Boston lawyer
James  Otis  invoked  English  legal  precedents  to  chal-
lenge  open-ended  search  warrants.  In  demanding  a
jury  trial  for  John  Hancock  in  the  late  1760s,  John
Adams  appealed  to  the  Magna  Carta  (1215),  the
ancient  document  that,  said  Adams,  “has  for  many
Centuries  been  esteemed  by  Englishmen,  as  one  of
the . . . firmest  Bulwarks  of  their  Liberties.”  Other
lawyers protested that new strictures violated specific
“liberties and privileges” granted in colonial charters or
embodied in Britain’s “ancient constitution.”

Enlightenment rationalism provided Patriots with
a  second  important  intellectual  resource.  Virginia
planter  Thomas  Jefferson  and  other  Patriots  drew  on
the  writings  of  John  Locke,  who  had  argued  that  all
individuals  possessed  certain  “natural  rights” — life,
liberty, and property — that governments must protect
(see  Chapter  4).  And  they  turned  to  the  works  of

CHAPTER 5

  The Problem of Empire, 1763–1776

159

French  philosopher  Montesquieu,  who  had  main-
tained  that  a  “separation  of  powers”  among  govern-
ment departments prevented arbitrary rule.

The  republican  and  Whig  strands  of  the  English
political tradition provided a third ideological source
for American Patriots. Puritan New England had long
venerated the Commonwealth era (1649–1660), when
England had been a republic (see Chapter 2). After the
Glorious  Revolution  of  1688–1689,  many  colonists
praised the English Whigs for creating a constitutional
monarchy that prevented the king from imposing taxes
and other measures. Joseph Warren, a physician and a
Radical  Whig  Patriot,  suggested  that  the  Stamp  Act
was part of a ministerial plot “to force the colonies into
rebellion”  and  justify  the  use  of  “military  power  to
reduce  them  to  servitude.”  John  Dickinson’s  Letters
from a Farmer in Pennsylvania (1768) urged colonists
to “remember your ancestors and your posterity” and
oppose  parliamentary  taxes.  The  letters  circulated
widely  and  served  as  an  early  call  to  resistance.  If
Parliament  could  tax  the  colonies  without  their  con-
sent, he wrote, “our boasted liberty is but A sound and
nothing else.”

Such arguments, widely publicized in newspapers
and  pamphlets,  gave  intellectual  substance  to  the
Patriot  movement  and  turned  a  series  of  impromptu
riots, tax protests, and boycotts of British manufactures
into a formidable political force.

Another Kind of Freedom
“We  are  taxed  without  our  own  consent,”  Dickinson
wrote  in  one  of  his  Letters.  “We  are  therefore —
SLAVES.”  As  Patriot  writers  argued  that  taxation
without  representation  made  colonists  the  slaves  of
Parliament,  many,  including  Benjamin  Franklin  in
Philadelphia  and  James  Otis  in
Massachusetts, also began to con-
demn  the  institution  of  chattel
slavery  itself  as  a  violation  of
slaves’  natural  rights.  African
Americans  made  the  connection
as  well.  In  Massa chusetts,  slaves
submitted at least four petitions to
the legislature asking that slavery be abolished. As one
petition  noted,  slaves  “have  in  common  with  other
men, a natural right to be free, and without molesta-
tion,  to  enjoy  such  property,  as  they  may  acquire  by
their industry.”

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
Why were southerners
more threatened by chal-
lenges to the institution of
slavery than northerners?

In the southern colonies, where slaves constituted
half  or  more  of  the  population  and  the  economy
depended  on  their  servitude,  the  quest  for  freedom

