160

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

alarmed  slaveholders.  In  November  1773,  a  group  of
Virginia slaves hoped to win their freedom by support-
ing British troops that, they heard, would soon arrive
in the colony. Their plan was uncovered, and, as James
Madison  wrote,  “proper  precautions”  were  taken  “to
prevent the Infection” from spreading. He fully under-
stood how important it was to defend the colonists’ lib-
erties  without  allowing  the  idea  of  natural  rights  to
undermine the institution of slavery. “It is prudent,” he
wrote, “such things should be concealed as well as sup-
pressed.”  Throughout  the  Revolution,  the  quest  for
African American rights and liberties would play out
alongside that of the colonies, but unlike national inde-
pendence, the liberation of African Americans would
not be fulfilled for many generations.

Parliament and Patriots
Square Off Again
When  news  of  the  Stamp  Act  riots  and  the  boycott
reached  Britain,  Parliament  was  already  in  turmoil.
Disputes  over  domestic  policy  had  led  George  III  to
dismiss  Grenville  as  prime  minister  (Table  5.2).
However,  Grenville’s  allies  demanded  that  imperial
reform continue, if necessary at gunpoint. “The British
legislature,” declared Chief Justice Sir James Mansfield,
“has  authority  to  bind  every  part  and  every  subject,
whether such subjects have a right to vote or not.”

Yet  a  majority  in  Parliament  was  persuaded  that
the Stamp Act was cutting deeply into British exports
and thus doing more harm than good. “The Avenues
of  Trade  are  all  shut  up,”  a  Bristol  merchant  told
Parliament:  “We  have  no  Remittances  and  are  at  our
Witts End for want of Money to fulfill our Engagements
with our Tradesmen.” Grenville’s successor, the Earl of
Rockingham,  forged  a  compromise.  To  mollify  the
colonists  and  help  British  merchants,  he  repealed
the  Stamp  Act  and  reduced  the  duty  on  molasses
imposed by the Sugar Act to a penny a gallon. Then he
pacified  imperial  reformers  and  hard-liners  with  the
Declaratory  Act  of  1766,  which  explicitly  reaffirmed
Parliament’s  “full  power  and  authority  to  make  laws
and  statutes . . . to  bind  the  colonies  and  people  of
America . . . in all cases whatsoever.” By swiftly ending
the Stamp Act crisis, Rockingham hoped it would be
forgotten just as quickly.

Charles Townshend  Steps  In  Often  the  course  of
history is changed by a small event — an illness, a per-
sonal  grudge,  a  chance  remark.  That  was  the  case  in
1767, when George III named William Pitt to head a
new government. Pitt, chronically ill and often absent

Phillis Wheatley

Born in West Africa and enslaved as a child, Phillis Wheatley
was purchased by Boston merchant and tailor John Wheatley
when she was eight. Tutored by Wheatley’s children, Phillis
learned to read English, Greek, and Latin by the age of
twelve. This engraving, which pictures her at a writing desk,
was the frontispiece for her Poems on Various Subjects,
Religious and Moral (1773), which was praised by George
Washington and gained attention in both Britain and the
colonies. Freed upon the death of her master, Wheatley
married John Peters, a free black man. He was later impris-
oned for debt, forcing Wheatley to take employment as a
maid. She died in 1784 at age thirty-one; none of her three
children survived infancy. Library of Congress.

TABLE 5.2

Ministerial Instability in Britain, 1760–1782

Leading Minister

Dates of
Ministry

American Policy

Lord Bute

1760–1763 Mildly reformist

George Grenville

1763–1765

Ardently reformist

Lord Rockingham

1765–1766

Accommodationist

William Pitt /
Charles Townshend

1766–1770

Ardently reformist

Lord North

1770–1782

Coercive

