CHAPTER 5

  The Problem of Empire, 1763–1776

161

Celebrating Repeal

This British cartoon mocking
supporters of the Stamp
Act — “The Repeal, or the
Funeral Procession of Miss
Americ-Stamp” — was probably
commissioned by merchants
trading with America. Preceded
by two ﬂag bearers, George
Grenville, the author of the
legislation, carries a miniature
cofﬁn (representing the act) to a
tomb, as a dog urinates on the
leader of the procession. Two
bales on the wharf, labeled
“Stamps from America” and
“Black cloth return’d from
America,” testify to the failure
of the act. The Granger Collection,
New York.

from  parliamentary  debates,  left  chancellor  of  the
exchequer Charles Townshend in command. Pitt was
sympathetic  toward  America;  Townshend  was  not.
As a member of the Board of Trade, Townshend had
sought  restrictions  on  the  colonial  assemblies  and
strongly supported the Stamp Act. In 1767, he prom-
ised to find a new source of revenue in America.

The  new  tax  legislation,  the  Townshend  Act  of
1767,  had  both  fiscal  and  political  goals.  It  imposed
duties  on  colonial  imports  of  paper,  paint,  glass,  and
tea  that  were  expected  to  raise  about  £40,000  a  year.
Though Townshend did allocate some of this revenue
for American military expenses, he earmarked most of
it  to  pay  the  salaries  of  royal  governors,  judges,  and
other  imperial  officials,  who  had  always  previously
been paid by colonial assemblies. Now, he hoped, royal
appointees  could  better  enforce  parliamentary  laws
and carry out the king’s instructions. Townshend next
devised  the  Revenue  Act  of  1767,  which  created  a
board of customs commissioners in Boston and vice-
admiralty courts in Halifax, Boston, Philadelphia, and
Charleston.  By  using  parliamentary  taxes  to  finance
intended  to
imperial  administration,  Townshend
undermine American political institutions.

The  Townshend  duties  revived  the  constitutional
debate  over  taxation.  During  the  Stamp  Act  crisis,
some Americans, including Benjamin Franklin, distin-
guished between external and internal taxes. They sug-
gested that external duties on trade (such as those long
mandated by the Navigation Acts) were acceptable to
Americans, but that direct, or internal, taxes were not.

Townshend thought this distinction was “perfect non-
sense,” but he indulged the Americans and laid duties
only on trade.

A  Second  Boycott  and  the  Daughters  of
Liberty  Even  so,  most  colonial  leaders  rejected
the legitimacy of Townshend’s measures. In February
1768,  the  Massachusetts  assembly  condemned  the
Townshend Act, and Boston and New York merchants
began  a  new  boycott  of  British  goods.  Throughout
Puritan  New  England,  ministers  and  public  officials
discouraged the purchase of “foreign superfluities” and
promoted the domestic manufacture of cloth and other
necessities.

American women, ordinarily excluded from public
affairs,  became  crucial  to  the  nonimportation  move-
ment. They reduced their households’ consumption of
imported  goods  and  produced  large  quantities  of
homespun  cloth.  Pious  farmwives  spun  yarn  at  their
ministers’ homes. In Berwick, Maine, “true Daughters
of Liberty” celebrated American products by “drinking
rye coffee and dining on bear venison.” Other women’s
groups  supported  the  boycott  with  charitable  work,
spinning  flax  and  wool  for  the  needy.  Just  as  Patriot
men  followed  tradition  by  joining  crowd  actions,  so
women’s protests reflected their customary concern for
the well-being of the community.

Newspapers  celebrated  these  exploits  of  the
Daughters of Liberty. One Massachusetts town proudly
claimed an annual output of 30,000 yards of cloth; East
Hartford,  Connecticut,  reported  17,000  yards.  This

