162

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the nonimpor-
tation movement bring
women into the political
sphere?

surge in domestic production did
not  offset  the  loss  of  British
imports,  which  had  averaged
about  10  million  yards  of  cloth
annually,  but  it  brought  thou-
sands  of  women  into  the  public
arena.

The  boycott  mobilized  many  American  men  as
well. In the seaport cities, the Sons of Liberty published
the names of merchants who imported British goods
and harassed their employees and customers. By March
1769,  the  nonimportation  movement  had  spread  to
Philadelphia;  two  months  later,  the  members  of  the
Virginia House of Burgesses vowed not to buy dutied
articles,  luxury  goods,  or  imported  slaves.  Reflecting
colonial self-confidence, Benjamin Franklin called for a
return  to  the  pre-1763  mercantilist  system:  “Repeal
the laws, renounce the right, recall the troops, refund
the  money,  and  return  to  the  old  method  of
requisition.”

Despite  the  enthusiasm  of  Patriots,  nonimporta-
tion — accompanied  by  pressure  on  merchants  and
consumers  who  resisted  it — opened  fissures  in  colo-
nial society. Not only royal officials, but also merchants,
farmers, and ordinary folk, were subject to new forms
of  surveillance  and  coercion — a  pattern  that  would
only  become  more  pronounced  as  the  imperial  crisis
unfolded.

Troops
to  Boston  American  resistance  only
increased British determination. When the Massachu-
setts assembly’s letter opposing the Townshend duties
reached  London,  Lord  Hillsborough,  the  secretary  of
state  for  American  affairs,  branded  it  “unjustifiable
opposition  to  the  constitutional  authority  of  Parlia-
ment.”  To  strengthen  the  “Hand  of  Government”
in  Massachusetts,  Hillsborough  dispatched  General
Thomas  Gage  and  2,000  British  troops  to  Boston
(Map  5.3).  Once  in  Massachusetts,  Gage  accused  its
leaders  of  “Treasonable  and  desperate  Resolves”  and

Edenton Ladies’ Tea Party

In October 1774, a group of ﬁfty-one
women from Edenton, North Carolina, led
by Penelope Barker created a local association
to support a boycott of British goods. Patriots
in the colonies praised the Edenton Tea Party,
which was one of the ﬁrst formal female political
associations in North America, but it was ridiculed
in Britain, where this cartoon appeared in March
1775. The women are given a mannish appear-
ance, and the themes of promiscuity and neglect
to their female duties are suggested by the
presence of a slave and an amorous man, the
neglected child, and the urinating dog. Library of
Congress.

