CHAPTER 5

  The Problem of Empire, 1763–1776

163

1763

QUEBEC

Quebec
(cid:2)

Trois Rivières
Montreal

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

Michilimackinac

(cid:2)

Ft. Frontenac

(cid:2)

Ft. Detroit
(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Ft. Niagara

(cid:2)

Ft. Pitt

Ft. Chartres

(cid:2)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

Crown Point
Ticonderoga

Boston

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Albany

(cid:2)

New York

(cid:2)
Philadelphia

N

W

E

S

Ft. Prince George

(cid:2)

Charleston

Mobile

(cid:2) (cid:2)

Pensacola

St. Augustine

(cid:2)

Gulf  of  Me x ico

(after Shy)

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

Small detachment

Company

2–3 companies

4–5 companies

Battalion (350 men)

0

0

150

300 miles

150 300 kilometers

Louisbourg

(cid:2)(cid:2)

1775

QUEBEC

Quebec
(cid:2)

Halifax

Annapolis
Royal

Nova
Scotia

Trois Rivières

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

Michilimackinac

(cid:2)

Montreal

Ft. Frontenac

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Halifax

Nova
Scotia

(11 Battalions)

Crown Point
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

 Ticonderoga
(cid:2)

(cid:2)
Albany

Boston

(cid:2)

New York

(cid:2)
Philadelphia

N

W

E

S

Ft. Detroit

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Ft. Niagara

(cid:2)

Ft. Pitt

Ft. Chartres

(cid:2)

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

(cid:2)

Charleston

(cid:2)
Mobile

(cid:2)

Pensacola

(cid:2)

St. Augustine

Gulf  of  Me x ico

MAP 5.3
British Troop Deployments, 1763 and 1775

As the imperial crisis deepened, British military priorities changed. In 1763, most British battalions
were stationed in Canada to deter Indian uprisings and French Canadian revolts. After the Stamp
Act riots of 1765, the British placed large garrisons in New York and Philadelphia. By 1775, eleven
battalions of British regulars occupied Boston, the center of the Patriot movement.

advised the ministry to “Quash this Spirit at a Blow.” In
1765,  American  resistance  to  the  Stamp  Act  had
sparked a parliamentary debate; in 1768, it provoked a
plan for military coercion.

The Problem of the West
At the same time that successive ministries addressed
the problem of raising a colonial revenue, they quarreled
over  how  to  manage  the  vast  new  inland  territory —
about  half  a  billion  acres — acquired  in  the  Treaty  of
Paris in 1763 (see Chapter 4). The Proclamation Line
had  drawn  a  boundary  between  the  colonies  and
Indian  country.  The  line  was  originally  intended
as  a  temporary  barrier.  It  prohibited  settlement  “for
the present, and until our further Pleasure be known.”
The  Proclamation  also  created  three  new  mainland
colonies — Quebec,  East  Florida,  and  West  Florida —
and  thus  opened  new  opportunities  at  the  northern
and southern extremities of British North America.

interested  in  westward  expansion.  First,  gentlemen
who had invested in numerous land speculation com-
panies were petitioning the crown for large land grants
in  the  Ohio  country.  Second,  officers  who  served  in
the Seven Years’ War were paid in
land warrants — up to 5,000 acres
for  field  officers — and  some,  led
by  George  Washington,  were
exploring  possible  sites  beyond
the  Appalachians.  Third,  Indian
traders  who  had  received  large
grants  from  the  Ohio  Indians
hoped  to  sell  land  titles.  And  fourth,  thousands  of
squatters were following the roads cut to the Ohio by
the Braddock and Forbes campaigns during the Seven
Years’ War to take up lands in the hope that they could
later  receive  a  title  to  them.  “The  roads  are . . . alive
with Men, Women, Children, and Cattle from Jersey,
Pennsylvania,  and  Maryland,”  wrote  one  astonished
observer (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 164).

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What groups were most
interested in western
lands, and why did
Hillsborough oppose
them?

But many colonists looked west rather than north
or south. Four groups in the colonies were especially

All of this activity antagonized the Ohio Indians. In
1770, Shawnees invited hundreds of Indian leaders to

