T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Beyond the

Proclamation Line

Though the Royal Proclamation of 1763 called the territory between the Appa-
lachian  Mountains  and  the  Mississippi  River  “Indian  country,”  the  reality  was
more  complex  than  this  phrase  indicates.  The  following  documents  illustrate
some of the patterns that shaped life beyond the  Proclamation Line between
1763 and 1776.

1.  Colonel John Bradstreet’s Thoughts on Indian

3.  “Indians Giving a Talk to Colonel Bouquet,”

Affairs, 1764. Colonel John Bradstreet led a force
of British redcoats to Fort Niagara in response to
Pontiac’s Rebellion. He drafted these remarks
shortly afterward.

Of all the Savages upon the continent, the most knowing,
the most intriguing, the less useful, and the greatest Vil-
lains, are those most conversant with the Europeans, and
deserve most the attention of Govern[men]t by way of
correction, and these are the Six Nations, Shawanese and
Delawares; they are well acquainted with the defenceless
state of the Inhabitants, who live on the Frontiers, and
think they will ever have it in their power to distress and
plunder them, and never cease raising the jealousy of the
Upper Nations against us, by propagating amongst them
such stories, as make them believe the English have noth-
ing so much at heart as the extirpation of all Savages. The
apparent design of the Six Nations, is to keep us at war
with all Savages, but themselves, that they may be
employed as mediators between us and them.

2.  William Johnson to the British Lords of Trade, 1763.
William Johnson, a New Yorker with extensive
experience in Indian relations, was the crown’s
superintendent for Indian affairs in the northern
colonies.

[T]he Colonies, had all along neglected to cultivate a
proper understanding with the Indians, and from a
mistaken notion, have greatly dispised them, without
considering, that it is in their power at pleasure to lay
waste and destroy the Frontiers. . . . Without any exag-
eration, I look upon the Northern Indians to be the
most formidable of any uncivilized body of people in
the World. Hunting and War are their sole occupations,
and the one qualifies them for the other, they have few
wants, and those are easily supplied, their properties
of little value, consequently, expeditions against them
however successful, cannot distress them, and they
have courage sufficient for their manner of fighting,
the nature and situation of their Countrys, require
not more.

164

1766. Based on a painting by Benjamin West, this
engraving from a book about Bouquet’s campaign
to the Ohio following Pontiac’s Rebellion depicts
a meeting with Delaware, Seneca, and Shawnee
representatives in October 1764.

Source: The Granger Collection, New York.

4.  David Jones’s journal, 1773. David Jones was a Bap-
tist minister who traveled down the Ohio River in
1772 and 1773. His journal offers a compelling
glimpse of life in the valley’s trading communities.

FRIDAY [January] 22, in company with Mr. Irwine, set
out for Chillicaathee. . . . Here Mr. Irwine kept an assort-
ment of goods, and for that purpose rented an house from
an Indian whose name is Waappee Monneeto, often called
the White Devil. . . . Went to see Mr. Moses Henry a gun-
smith and trader from Lancaster. This gentleman has
lived for some years in this town, and is lawfully married
to a white woman, who was captivated so young that she
speaks the language as well as any Indian. . . . Mr. Henry
lives in a comfortable manner, having plenty of good beef,
pork, milk, &c. … Chillicaathee is the chief town of the
Shawannee Indians — it is situated north of a large plain

