adjacent to a branch of Paint Creek. This plain is their
corn-field, which supplies great part of their town. Their
houses are made of logs. . . .

WEDNESDAY [February] 10. . . . This is a small town

consisting of Delawares and Shawanees. The chief is a
Shawanee woman, who is esteemed very rich — she enter-
tains travelers — there were four of us in company, and for
our use, her negro quarter was evacuated this night, which
had a fire in the middle without any chimney. This woman
has a large stock, and supplied us with milk. Here we also
got corn for our horses at a very expensive price. . . .

FRIDAY [February] 12 . . . We passed [the Delaware
chief] Captain White Eye’s Town. . . . He told me that he
intended to be religious, and have his children educated.
He saw that their way of living would not answer much
longer — game grew scarce — they could not much longer
pretend to live by hunting, but must farm, &c. — But said,
he could not attend to matters of religion now, for he in-
tended to make a great hunt down Ohio, and take the
skins himself to Philadelphia.

5.  Killbuck to the governors of Pennsylvania, Mary-
land, and Virginia, December 1771. John Killbuck
Jr., or Gelelemend, a Delaware headman, aired
grievances on behalf of Ohio Delaware, Munsie,
and Mahican Indians.

Great numbers more of your people have come over the
Great Mountains and settled throughout this country, and
we are sorry to tell you, that several quarrels have hap-
pened between your people and ours, in which people
have been killed on both sides, and that we now see the
nations round us and your people ready to embroil in a
quarrel, which gives our nations great concerns, as we, on
our parts, want to live in friendship with you. As you have
always told us, you have laws to govern your people by,
-- but we do not see that you have; therefore, brethren,
unless you can fall upon some method of governing your
people who live between the Great Mountains and the
Ohio River and who are now very numerous, it will be
out of the Indians’ power to govern their young men, for
we assure you the black clouds begin to gather fast in this
country. . . . We find your people are very fond of our rich
land. We see them quarrelling every day about land and
burning one another’s houses, so that we do not know
how soon they may come over the river Ohio and drive us
from our villages, nor do we see you, brothers, take any
care to stop them.

6.  Aeneas MacKay to Pennsylvania governor John

Penn, April 4, 1774. MacKay, a magistrate of Penn-
sylvania’s Westmoreland County, reported on
Virginia’s effort to create a competing jurisdiction
in the vicinity of Pittsburgh. Dr. John Connolly,
appointed by Governor Dunmore as commander

of the militia in Pittsburgh, was at the center of
the controversy.

Since the return of the Celebrated Doctor Connelly from
Virginia last to this place, which he did on the 28th of
March, our village is become the scene of anarchy and
Confusion. . . .

The Doctor now is in actual possession of the Fort,
with a Body Guard of Militia about him, Invested, as we
are told, with both Civil & military power, to put the Vir-
ginia Law in Force in these parts, and a considerable
Number of the Inhabitants of these back Parts of this
Country, Ready to join him on any emergency, every arti-
fice are used to seduce the people, some by being promoted
to Civil or military employments, and others with the
promises of grants of Lands, on easy Terms, & the giddy
headed mobs are so Infatuated as to suffer themselves to
be carried away by these Insinuating Delusions. . . .

The Indians are greatly alarmed at seeing parties of

armed men patrolling through our streets Daily, not
knowing but there is hostility intended against them and
their country.

Sources: (1, 2) E. B. O’Callaghan and Berthold Fernow, eds., Documents Relative to the
Colonial History of the State of New York, 15 vols. (Albany, 1856–1887), 7: 690–694, 574;
(4) David Jones, A Journal of Two Visits Made to Some Nations of Indians on the West
Side of the River Ohio, in the Years 1772 and 1773 (Burlington, 1774 [rep. NY, 1971]);
(5) K. G. Davies, ed., Documents of the American Revolution, 1770–1783, 19 vols.
(Shannon and Dublin, 1972–1981), 3: 254–255; (6) Samuel Hazard, ed., Pennsylvania
Archives, series 1, 12 vols. (Philadelphia: Joseph Severns & Co., 1856), 4: 484–486.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  John Bradstreet, a career British army ofﬁcer, based his
observations (source 1) on his wartime experiences in
the West. William Johnson (source 2) had lived in close
proximity to Iroquois Indians for many years. Compare
their views: what do they agree upon, and where do
they differ?

2.  Charles Grignion’s engraving (source 3) appeared in print
a short time after Pontiac’s Rebellion. How does it por-
tray the Ohio Indians? Compare Grignion’s image with
the descriptions in sources 1 and 2 and John Killbuck’s
speech (source 5). What parallels or differences do you
see?

3.  What do you ﬁnd most surprising about source 4? What
evidence of European inﬂuence do you see in the Indian
towns Jones describes?

4.  Sources 5 and 6 describe the state of affairs on the upper
Ohio shortly before the outbreak of Dunmore’s War.
What concerns does Killbuck express? Why was Virginia’s
willingness to organize a militia so important to the
residents of the region?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Using these documents and what you have learned in
Chapter 5, write a short essay that surveys British and
Anglo-American attitudes toward the Ohio Indians and
explores the contradictions between these attitudes
and the reality of life in the Ohio country.

165

