166

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

gather at the town of Chillicothe on the Scioto River.
There  they  formed  the  Scioto  Confederacy,  which
pledged to oppose any further expansion into the Ohio
country.

Meanwhile,  in  London,  the  idea  that  the  Procla-
mation  Line  was  only  temporary  gave  way  to  the
view that it should be permanent. Hillsborough, who
became colonial secretary in 1768, adamantly opposed
westward  expansion,  believing  it  would  antagonize
the Indians without benefitting the empire. Moreover,
he  owned  vast  Irish  estates,  and  he  was  alarmed  by
the  number  of  tenants  who  were  leaving  Ireland  for
America.  To  preserve  Britain’s  laboring  class,  as  well
as  control  costs,  Hillsborough  wanted  to  make  the
Proclamation Line permanent.

For  colonists  who  were  already  moving  west  to
settle in large numbers, this shift in policy caused con-
fusion  and  frustration.  Eventually,  like  the  Patriots
along the seaboard, they would take matters into their
own hands.

Parliament Wavers
In  Britain,  the  colonies’  nonimportation  agreement
was taking its toll. In 1768, the colonies had cut imports
of British manufactures in half; by 1769, the mainland
colonies had a trade surplus with Britain of £816,000.
Hard-hit  by  these  developments,  British  merchants
and manufacturers petitioned Parliament to repeal the
Townshend duties. Early in 1770, Lord North became
prime minister. A witty man and a skillful politician,
North  designed  a  new  compromise.  Arguing  that  it
was foolish to tax British exports to America (thereby
raising  their  price  and  decreasing  consumption),  he
persuaded Parliament to repeal most of the Townshend

duties.  However,  North  retained  the  tax  on  tea  as  a
symbol of Parliament’s supremacy (Figure 5.2).

The  Boston  Massacre  Even  as  Parliament  was
debating  North’s  repeal,  events  in  Boston  guaranteed
that  reconciliation  between  Patriots  and  Parliament
would  be  hard  to  achieve.  Between  1,200  and  2,000
troops  had  been  stationed  in  Boston  for  a  year  and
a  half.  Soldiers  were  also  stationed  in  New  York,
Philadelphia, several towns in New Jersey, and various
frontier  outposts  in  these  years,  with  a  minimum  of
conflict or violence. But in Boston — a small port town
on a tiny peninsula — the troops numbered 10 percent
of the local population, and their presence wore on the
locals. On the night of March 5, 1770, a group of nine
British  redcoats  fired  into  a  crowd  and  killed  five
townspeople.  A  subsequent  trial  exonerated  the  sol-
diers, but Boston’s Radical Whigs, convinced of a min-
isterial conspiracy against liberty, labeled the incident a
“massacre” and used it to rally sentiment against impe-
rial power.

Sovereignty Debated  When news of North’s com-
promise  arrived  in  the  colonies  in  the  wake  of  the
Boston  Massacre,  the  reaction  was  mixed.  Most  of
Britain’s  colonists  remained  loyal  to  the  empire,  but
five  years  of  conflict  had  taken  their  toll.  In  1765,
American leaders had accepted Parliament’s authority;
the  Stamp  Act  Resolves  had  opposed  only  certain
“unconstitutional” legislation. By 1770, the most out-
spoken Patriots — Benjamin Franklin in Pennsylvania,
Patrick  Henry  in  Virginia,  and  Samuel  Adams  in
Massachusetts — repudiated parliamentary supremacy
and  claimed  equality  for  the  American  assemblies
within the empire. Franklin suggested that the colonies

Imports from Britain
Boycott periods

Exports to Britain (£, millions)

Credit crisis

Repeal of
Townshend Act

Tea Act

Townshend Act

Stamp Act

Colonial
trade
deficit

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

1763

1765

1767

1769

1771

1773

1775

1776

FIGURE 5.2
Trade as a Political Weapon, 1763–1776

Political upheaval did not affect the
mainland colonies’ exports to Britain,
which rose slightly over the period, but
imports ﬂuctuated greatly. The American
boycott of 1765–1766 prompted a dip
in imports, but the second boycott of
1768–1770 led to a sharp drop in imports
of British textiles, metal goods, and cer-
amics. Imports of manufactures soared
after the repeal of the Townshend duties,
only to plummet when the First Continen-
tal Congress proclaimed a third boycott
in 1774.

