CHAPTER 5

  The Problem of Empire, 1763–1776

167

Patriot Propaganda

Silversmith Paul Revere issued this engraving of the confrontation between British redcoats and snowball-
throwing Bostonians in the days after it occurred. To whip up opposition to the military occupation of their
town, Revere and other Patriots labeled the incident “The Boston Massacre.” The shooting conﬁrmed their
Radical Whig belief that “standing armies” were instruments of tyranny. Library of Congress.

were now “distinct and separate states” with “the same
Head, or Sovereign, the King.”

Franklin’s  suggestion  outraged  Thomas  Hutchin-
son,  the  American-born  royal  governor  of  Massa-
chusetts. Hutchinson emphatically rejected the idea of
“two  independent  legislatures  in  one  and  the  same
state.” He told the Massachusetts assembly, “I know of
no line that can be drawn between the supreme author-
ity  of  Parliament  and  the  total  independence  of  the
colonies.”

There  the  matter  rested.  The  British  had  twice
imposed revenue acts on the colonies, and American
Patriots  had  twice  forced  a  retreat.  If  Parliament

insisted  on  a  policy  of  constitutional  absolutism  by
imposing  taxes  a  third  time,  some  Americans  were
prepared  to  pursue  violent  resistance.  Nor  did  they
flinch  when  reminded  that  George  III  condemned
their agitation. As the Massachusetts House replied to
Hutchinson,  “There  is  more  rea-
son  to  dread  the  consequences
of absolute uncontrolled supreme
power,  whether  of  a  nation  or  a
monarch, than those of total inde-
pendence.”  Fearful  of  civil  war,
Lord North’s ministry hesitated to
force the issue.

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
What was Benjamin
Franklin’s position on
colonial representation
in 1765, and why had his
view changed by 1770?

