168

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

The Road to Independence,
1771–1776
Repeal of the Townshend duties in 1770 restored har-
mony  to  the  British  Empire,  but  strong  feelings  and
mutual  distrust  lay  just  below  the  surface.  In  1773,
those emotions erupted, destroying any hope of com-
promise.  Within  two  years,  the  Americans  and  the
British clashed in armed conflict. Despite widespread
resistance among loyal colonists, Patriot legislators cre-
ated provisional governments and military forces, the
two essentials for independence.

A Compromise Repudiated
Once aroused, political passions are not easily quieted.
In  Boston,  Samuel  Adams  and  other  radical  Patriots
continued to warn Americans of imperial domination
and,  late  in  1772,  persuaded  the  town  meeting  to
set  up  a  committee  of  correspondence  “to  state  the
Rights of the Colonists of this Province.” Soon, eighty
Massachusetts  towns  had  similar  committees.  When
British  officials  threatened  to  seize  the  Americans
responsible for the burning of the customs vessel Gaspée
and  prosecute  them  in Britain,  the  Virginia  House  of
Burgesses and several other assemblies set up their own
committees  of  correspondence.  These  standing  com-
mittees allowed Patriots to communicate with leaders
in other colonies when new threats to liberty occurred.
By  1774,  among  the  colonies  that  would  later  declare
independence, only Pennsylvania was without one.

The East India Company and the Tea Act  These
committees sprang into action when Parliament passed
the  Tea  Act  of  May  1773.  The  act  provided  financial
relief for the East India Company, a royally chartered
private  corporation  that  served  as  the  instrument  of
British imperialism. The company was deeply in debt; it
also had a huge surplus of tea as a result of high import
duties, which led Britons and col-
onists  alike  to  drink  smuggled
Dutch  tea  instead.  The  Tea  Act
gave  the  company  a  government
loan  and,  to  boost  its  revenue,
canceled the import duties on tea
the company exported to Ireland
and  the  American  colonies.  Now
even with the Town shend duty of
3  pence  a  pound  on  tea,  high-quality  East  India
Company  tea  would  cost  less  than  the  Dutch  tea
smuggled into the colonies by American merchants.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Why did colonists react so
strongly against the Tea
Act, which imposed a small
tax and actually lowered
the price of tea?

Radical Patriots accused the British ministry of brib-
ing Americans with the cheaper East India Company’s
tea so they would give up their principled opposition to
the  tea  tax.  As  an  anonymous  woman  wrote  to  the
Massachusetts Spy, “The use of [British] tea is considered
not as a private but as a public evil . . . a handle to intro-
duce a variety of . . . oppressions amongst us.” Merchants
joined  the  protest  because  the  East  India  Company
planned  to  distribute  its  tea  directly  to  shopkeepers,
excluding American wholesalers from the trade’s profits.
“The  fear  of  an  Introduction  of  a  Monopoly  in  this
Country,” British general Frederick Haldimand reported
from  New  York,  “has  induced  the  mercantile  part  of
the Inhabitants to be very industrious in opposing this
Step  and  added  Strength  to  a  Spirit of  Independence
already too prevalent.”

The Tea Party and the Coercive Acts  The Sons of
Liberty  prevented  East  India  Company  ships  from
delivering  their  cargoes  in  New  York,  Philadelphia,
and  Charleston.  In  Massachusetts,  Royal  Governor
Hutchinson  was  determined  to  land  the  tea  and  col-
lect  the  tax.  To  foil  the  governor’s  plan,  artisans  and
laborers  disguised  as  Indians  boarded  three  ships —
the  Dartmouth,  the  Eleanor,  and  the  Beaver — on
December  16,  1773,  broke  open  342  chests  of  tea
(valued  at  about  £10,000,  or  about  $900,000  today),
and threw them into the harbor. “This destruction of
the  Tea . . . must  have  so  important  Consequences,”
John Adams wrote in his diary, “that I cannot but con-
sider it as an Epoch in History.”

The  king  was  outraged.  “Concessions  have  made
matters  worse,”  George  III  declared.  “The  time  has
come  for  compulsion.”  Early  in  1774,  Parliament
passed four Coercive Acts to force Massachusetts to pay
for  the  tea  and  to  submit  to  imperial  authority.  The
Boston Port Bill closed Boston Harbor to shipping; the
Massachusetts Government Act annulled the colony’s
charter  and  prohibited  most  town  meetings;  a  new
Quartering  Act  mandated  new  barracks  for  British
troops;  and  the  Justice  Act  allowed  trials  for  capital
crimes to be transferred to other colonies or to Britain.
Patriot  leaders  throughout  the  colonies  branded
the measures “Intolerable” and rallied support for Mas-
sa chusetts. In Georgia, a Patriot warned the “Freemen
of  the  Province”  that  “every  privilege  you  at  present
claim as a birthright, may be wrested from you by the
same  authority  that  blockades  the  town  of  Boston.”
“The cause of Boston,” George Washington declared in
Virginia,  “now  is  and  ever  will  be  considered  as  the
cause of America.” The committees of correspondence
had created a firm sense of Patriot unity.

