CHAPTER 5

  The Problem of Empire, 1763–1776

169

The Boston Tea Party

Led by radical Patriots disguised as Mohawk Indians, Bostonians dumped the East India Company’s taxed
tea into the harbor. The rioters made clear their “pure” political motives by punishing those who sought
personal gain: one Son of Liberty who stole some of the tea was “stripped of his booty and his clothes
together, and sent home naked.” Library of Congress.

In  1774,  Parliament  also  passed  the  Quebec  Act,
which  allowed  the  practice of  Roman  Catholicism  in
Quebec.  This  concession  to  Quebec’s  predominantly
Catholic  population  reignited  religious  passions  in
New  England,  where  Protestants  associated  Catholi-
cism with arbitrary royal government. Because the act
extended  Quebec’s  boundaries  into  the  Ohio  River
Valley, it likewise angered influential land speculators
in Virginia and Pennsylvania and ordinary settlers by
the  thousands  (Map  5.4).  Although  the  ministry  did
not intend the Quebec Act as a coercive measure, many
colonists saw it as further proof of Parliament’s inten-
tion to control American affairs.

The Continental Congress Responds
In response to the Coercive Acts, Patriot leaders con-
vened  a  new  continent-wide  body,  the  Continental
Congress.  Twelve  mainland  colonies  sent  representa-
tives. Four recently acquired colonies — Florida, Quebec,
Nova  Scotia,  and  Newfoundland — refused  to  send
delegates,  as  did  Georgia,  where  the  royal  governor
controlled the legislature. The assemblies of Barbados,
Jamaica, and the other sugar islands, although wary of

British domination, were even more fearful of revolts
by their predominantly African populations and there-
fore declined to attend.

The delegates who met in Philadelphia in September
1774  had  different  agendas.  Southern  representatives,
fearing a British plot “to overturn the constitution and
introduce a system of arbitrary government,” advocated
a new economic boycott. Independence-minded repre-
sentatives from New England demanded political union
and  defensive  military  preparations.  Many  delegates
from the Middle Atlantic colonies favored compromise.
Led  by  Joseph  Galloway  of  Pennsylvania,  these
men of “loyal principles” proposed a new political sys-
tem  similar  to  Benjamin  Franklin’s  proposal  at  the
Albany  Congress  of  1754:  each  colony  would  retain
its  assembly  to  legislate  on  local  matters,  and  a  new
continent-wide body would handle general American
affairs. The king would appoint a president-general to
preside over a legislative council selected by the colonial
assemblies. Galloway’s plan failed by a single vote; a bare
majority  thought  it  was  too  conciliatory  (American
Voices, p. 172).

Instead, the delegates demanded the repeal of the
Coercive  Acts  and  stipulated  that  British  control

