MAP 5.4
British Western Policy, 1763–1774

The Proclamation of 1763 prohibited white
settlement west of the Appalachian Mountains.
Nonetheless, Anglo-American settlers and
land speculators proposed the new colonies
of Vandalia and Transylvania to the west of
Virginia and North Carolina. The Quebec
Act of 1774 designated most western lands
as Indian reserves and vastly enlarged the
boundaries of Quebec, dashing speculators’
hopes and eliminating the old sea-to-sea land
claims of many seaboard colonies. The act
especially angered New England Protestants,
who condemned it for allowing French resi-
dents to practice Catholicism, and colonial
political leaders, who protested its failure to
provide Quebec with a representative assembly.

170

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

HUD S O N ' S B AY C OMPANY

Quebec

(cid:2)

50°N

Gulf of
St. Lawrence

Louisbourg

(cid:2)

Lake Superior

(VIRGINIA)

Michigan Lake
Huro

n

e
k
a
L

(VIRGINIA AND MASS.)

(VIRGINIA AND CONN.)

LakeErie

R.

(MASS.)

Montreal

(cid:2)

St.Lawrence

L. Ontario

NEW
YORK
(cid:2)

Albany

N.H.

MASS.

(cid:2)

Boston

W

CONN.

R.I.

(cid:2)
New York

PENN.
Philadelphia

(cid:2)
N.J.

(cid:2)

Port Royal

N

E

S

40°N

(VIRGINIA)

MD. DEL.

OhioR.
TRANSYLVANIA

VANDALIA

VIRGINIA

NORTH CAROLINA

SOUTH
CAROLINA

(cid:2)

Charleston

GEORGIA

(CLAIMED BY SPAIN
AND GEORGIA)

Gulf of Mexico

90°W

80°W

ATLANTIC
O CEAN

150

300 miles

0

0

150

300 kilometers

Boundaries after
Treaty of Paris, 1763
British trading company
13 Colonies
Other British possessions
Spain

Quebec in 1763
Quebec in 1774
Proclamation Line of 1763
State boundaries including
western claims
Proposed western colonies

70°W

30°N

S
P
A
N
I
S
H

L
O
U
I
S
I
A
N
A

R.
pi

Mississip

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
Why did Parliament prefer
North’s solution to the
Boston Tea Party to
William Pitt’s?

be limited to matters of trade. It also approved a pro-
gram  of  economic  retaliation:  Americans  would  stop
importing  British  goods
in
December 1774. If Parliament did
not  repeal  the  Coercive  Acts  by
September  1775,  the  Congress
vowed to cut off virtually all colo-
nial  exports  to  Britain,  Ireland,
and  the  British  West  Indies.  Ten
years  of  constitutional  conflict
had  culminated  in  a  threat  of  all-out  commercial
warfare.

Lord Dartmouth’s proposal to send commissioners to
negotiate  a  settlement.  Instead,  Lord  North  set  strin-
gent terms: Americans must pay for their own defense
and  administration  and  acknowledge  Parliament’s
authority to tax them. To put teeth in these demands,
North  imposed  a  naval  blockade  on  American  trade
with foreign nations and ordered General Gage to sup-
press dissent in Massachusetts. “Now the case seemed
desperate,” the prime minister told Thomas Hutchinson,
whom  the  Patriots  had  forced  into  exile  in  London.
“Parliament  would  not — could  not — concede.  For
aught he could see it must come to violence.”

A few British leaders still hoped for compromise. In
January 1775, William Pitt, now sitting in the House of
Lords  as  the  Earl  of  Chatham,  asked  Parliament  to
renounce  its  power  to  tax  the  colonies  and  to  recog-
nize  the  Continental  Congress  as  a  lawful  body.  In
return, he suggested, the Congress should acknowledge
parliamentary  supremacy  and  provide  a  permanent
source of revenue to help defray the national debt.

The  British  ministry  rejected  Pitt’s  plan.  Twice  it
had backed down in the face of colonial resistance; a
third retreat was impossible. Branding the Continental
Congress  an  illegal  assembly,  the  ministry  rejected

The Rising of the Countryside
The  fate  of  the  urban-led  Patriot  movement  would
depend  on  the  colonies’ large  rural  population.  Most
farmers had little interest in imperial affairs. Their lives
were  deeply  rooted  in  the  soil,  and  their  prime  alle-
giance was to family and community. But imperial pol-
icies  had  increasingly  intruded  into  the  lives  of  farm
families by sending their sons to war and raising their
taxes. In 1754, farmers on Long Island, New York, had
paid an average tax of 10 shillings; by 1756, thanks to

