CHAPTER 5

  The Problem of Empire, 1763–1776

171

the Great War for Empire, their taxes had jumped to
30 shillings.

The Continental Association  The boycotts of 1765
and  1768  raised  the  political  consciousness  of  rural
Americans.  When  the  First  Continental  Congress
established  the  Continental  Association  in  1774  to
enforce a third boycott of British goods, it quickly set
up  a  rural  network  of  committees  to  do  its  work.  In
Concord, Massachusetts, 80 percent of the male heads
of  families  and  a  number  of  single  women  signed  a
“Solemn  League  and  Covenant”  supporting  nonim-
portation.  In  other  farm  towns,  men  blacked  their
faces, disguised themselves in blankets “like Indians,”
and  threatened  violence  against  shopkeepers  who
traded “in rum, molasses, & Sugar, &c.” in violation of
the boycott.

Patriots  likewise  warned  that  British  measures
threatened the yeoman tradition of landownership. In
Petersham, Massachusetts, the town meeting worried
that new British taxes would drain “this People of the
Fruits  of  their  Toil.”  Arable  land  was  now  scarce  and
expensive in older communities, and in new settlements
merchants  were  seizing  farmsteads  for  delinquent

debts. By the 1770s, many northern yeomen felt per-
sonally threatened by British policies, which, a Patriot
pamphlet warned, were “paving the way for reducing
the country to lordships” (Table 5.3).

Southern  Planters  Fear  Dependency  Despite
their higher standard of living, southern slave owners
had  similar  fears.  Many  Chesapeake  planters  were
deeply  in  debt  to  British  merchants.  Accustomed  to
being absolute masters on their slave-labor plantations
and seeing themselves as guardians of English liberties,
planters resented their financial dependence on British
creditors and dreaded the prospect of political subser-
vience to British officials.

That  danger  now  seemed  real.  If  Parliament  used
the  Coercive  Acts  to  subdue  Massachusetts,  then  it
might turn next to Virginia, dissolving its representa-
tive assembly and assisting British merchants to seize
debt-burdened properties. Consequently, the Virginia
gentry supported demands by indebted yeomen farm-
ers to close the law courts so that they could bargain
with merchants over debts without the threat of legal
action. “The spark of liberty is not yet extinct among
our  people,”  declared  one  planter,  “and  if  properly

TABLE 5.3

Patriot Resistance, 1762–1776

Date

1762

1763

1764

British Action

Revenue Act

Proclamation Line

Sugar Act

1765

Stamp Act

1765

Quartering Act

1767–1768

Townshend Act; military occupation of Boston

Patriot Response

Merchants complain privately

Land speculators voice discontent

Merchants and Massachusetts legislature
protest

Sons of Liberty riot; Stamp Act Congress;
ﬁrst boycott of British goods

New York assembly refuses to fund
until 1767

Second boycott of British goods; harassment
of pro-British merchants

1772

1773

1774

1775

Royal commission to investigate Gaspée affair

Committees of correspondence form

Tea Act

Coercive Acts; Quebec Act

British raids near Boston; king’s Proclamation
for Suppressing Rebellion and Sedition

Widespread resistance; Boston Tea Party

First Continental Congress; third boycott of
British goods

Armed resistance; Second Continental
Congress; invasion of Canada; cutoff of
colonial exports

1776

Military attacks led by royal governors in South Paine’s Common Sense; Declaration of

Independence

