A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

The Debate over

Representation and

Sovereignty

Speaking before the House of Commons, Benjamin Franklin declared that before
1763 Americans had paid little attention to the question of Parliament’s “right
to lay taxes and duties” in the colonies. The reason was simple, Franklin said: “A
right to lay internal taxes was never supposed to be in Parliament, as we are not
represented there.” Franklin recognized that representation was central to the
imperial debate. As the following selections show, the failure to solve the prob-
lem of representation, and the closely related issue of parliamentary sovereignty,
led to the American rebellion.

Jared Ingersoll
Report on the Debates in Parliament (1765)

Connecticut  lawyer  Jared  Ingersoll  (1722–1781)  served  as
his colony’s agent, or lobbyist, in Britain. In this 1765 letter
to the governor of Connecticut, Ingersoll summarizes the
debate then under way in Parliament over the Stamp Act.
When  the  act  passed,  he  returned  home  to  become  the
stamp  distributor  in  Connecticut.  A  mob  forced  him  to
resign that post. Ingersoll later served as a vice-admiralty
judge in Philadelphia and, during the Revolution, remained
loyal to Britain.

The principal Attention has been to the Stamp bill that
has been preparing to Lay before Parliament for taxing
America. The Point of the Authority of Parliament to
impose such Tax I found on my Arrival here was so fully
and Universally yielded [accepted], that there was not the
least hopes of making any impressions that way. . . .

I beg leave to give you a Summary of the Arguments
which are made use of in favour of such Authority. The
House of Commons, say they, is a branch of the supreme
legislature of the Nation, and which in its Nature is sup-
posed to represent, or rather to stand in the place of, the
Commons, that is, of the great body of the people. . . .

That this house of Commons, therefore, is now . . . a
part of the Supreme unlimited power of the Nation, as in
every State there must be some unlimited Power and
Authority. . . .

They say a Power to tax is a necessary part of every
Supreme Legislative Authority, and that if they have not
that Power over America, they have none, and then
America is at once a Kingdom of itself.

On the other hand those who oppose the bill say, it is
true the Parliament have a supreme unlimited Authority
over every Part and Branch of the Kings dominions and
as well over Ireland as any other place.

Yet [they say] we believe a British parliament will
never think it prudent to tax Ireland [or America]. Tis
true they say, that the Commons of England and of the

172

British Empire are all represented in and by the house of
Commons, but this representation is confessedly on all
hands by Construction and Virtual [because most British
subjects] . . . have no hand in choosing the
representatives. . . .

[They say further] that the Effects of this implied
Representation here and in America must be infinitely
different in the Article of Taxation. . . . By any Mistake an
act of Parliament is made that prove injurious and hard
the Member of Parliament here [in Britain] sees with
his own Eyes and is moreover very accessible to the
people. . . . [Also,] the taxes are laid equally by one Rule
and fall as well on the Member himself as on the people.
But as to America, from the great distance in point of
Situation [they are not represented in the same way]. . . .
[Finally, the opponents of the Act say] we already

by the Regulations upon their trade draw from the
Americans all that they can spare. . . . This Step [of taxa-
tion] should not take place until or unless the Americans
are allowed to send Members to Parliament.

Thus I have given you, I think, the Substance of the

Arguments on both sides of that great and important
Question of the right and also of the Expediency of taxing
America by Authority of Parliament. . . . [But] upon a
Division of the house upon the Question, there was about
250 to about 50 in favour of the Bill.

Source: New Haven Colony Historical Society, Papers (1918), 9: 306–315.

Joseph Galloway
Plan of Union (1775)

Speaker  of  the  Pennsylvania  assembly  Joseph  Galloway
was  a  delegate  to  the  First  Continental  Congress,  where
he proposed a plan that addressed the issue of representa-
tion. The colonies would remain British but operate under
a continental government with the power to veto parlia-
mentary laws that affected America. Radical Patriots in the
Congress,  who  favored  independence,  prevented  a  vote

