on  Galloway’s  plan  and  suppressed  mention  of  it  in  the
records. Galloway remained loyal to the crown, fought on
the British side in the War for Independence, and moved
to England in 1778.

If we sincerely mean to accommodate the difference
between the two countries, . . . we must take into consid-
eration a number of facts which led the Parliament to pass
the acts complained of. . . . [You will recall] the dangerous
situation of the Colonies from the intrigues of France, and
the incursions of the Canadians and their Indian allies, at
the commencement of the last war. . . . Great-Britain sent
over her fleets and armies for their protection. . . .

In this state of the Colonies, it was not unreasonable
to expect that Parliament would have levied a tax on them
proportionate to their wealth, . . . Parliament was natu-
rally led to exercise the power which had been, by its
predecessors, so often exercised over the Colonies, and to
pass the Stamp Act. Against this act, the Colonies peti-
tioned Parliament, and denied its authority . . . [declaring]
that the Colonies could not be represented in that body.
This justly alarmed the British Senate. It was thought and
called by the ablest men [in] Britain, a clear and explicit
declaration of the American Independence, and com-
pelled the Parliament to pass the Declaratory Act, in
order to save its ancient and incontrovertible right of
supremacy over all the parts of the empire. . . .

Having thus briefly stated the arguments in favour
of parliamentary authority, . . . I am free to confess that
the exercise of that authority is not perfectly constitu-
tional in respect to the Colonies. We know that the
whole landed interest of Britain is represented in that
body, while neither the land nor the people of America
hold the least participation in the legislative authority of
the State. . . . Representation, or a participation in the
supreme councils of the State, is the great principle upon
which the freedom of the British Government is estab-
lished and secured.

I wish to see . . . the right to participate in the
supreme councils of the State extended, in some
form . . . to America . . . [and therefore] have prepared
the draught of a plan for uniting America more inti-
mately, in constitutional policy, with Great-Britain. . . .
I am certain when dispassionately considered, it will be
found to be the most perfect union in power and lib-
erty with the Parent State, next to a representation in
Parliament, and I trust it will be approved of by both
countries.

The Plan

That the several [colonial] assemblies shall [form an
American union and] choose members for the grand
council. . . .

That the Grand Council . . . shall hold and exercise
all the like rights, liberties and privileges, as are held and
exercised by and in the House of Commons of
Great-Britain. . . .

That the President-General shall hold his office during

the pleasure of the King, and his assent shall be requisite
to all acts of the Grand Council, and it shall be his office
and duty to cause them to be carried into execution. . . .
That the President-General, by and with the advice
and consent of the Grand-Council, hold and exercise all
the legislative rights, powers, and authorities, necessary
for regulating and administering all the general police
and affairs of the colonies. . . .

That the said President-General and the Grand
Council, be an inferior and distinct branch of the British
legislature, united and incorporated with it, . . . and that
the assent of both [Parliament and the Grand Council]
shall be requisite to the validity of all such general acts or
statutes [that affect the colonies].

Source: Joseph Galloway, Historical and Political Reflections on the Rise and Progress of
the American Rebellion (London, 1780), 70.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS
1.  According to Ingersoll, what were the main arguments
of those in Parliament who opposed the Stamp Act?
Did those opposing the Stamp Act agree with the act’s
supporters that Parliament had the right to tax the
colonies?

2.  How did Galloway’s plan solve the problem of colonial
representation in Parliament? How would the British
ministers who advocated parliamentary supremacy have
reacted to the plan?

3.  The framers of the U.S. Constitution addressed the prob-
lem of dividing authority between state governments
and the national government by allowing the states to
retain legal authority over most matters and delegating
limited powers to the national government. Could such
a solution have been implemented in the British Empire?
Why or why not?

173

