174

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

fanned by the Gentlemen of influence will, I make no
doubt, burst out again into a flame.”

Loyalists and Neutrals
Yet  in  many  places,  the  Patriot  movement  was  a
hard  sell.  In  Virginia,  Patriot  leaders  were  nearly  all
wealthy planters, and many of their poorer neighbors
regarded  the  movement  with  suspicion.  In  regions
where great landowners became Patriots — the Hudson
River Valley of New York, for example — many tenant
farmers  supported  the  king  because  they  hated  their
landlords.  Similar  social  conflicts  prompted  some
Regulators  in  the  North  Carolina  backcountry  and
many  farmers  in  eastern  Maryland  to  oppose  the
Patriots there.

There were many reasons to resist the Patriot move-
ment. Skeptics believed that Patriot leaders were sub-
verting British rule only to advance their own selfish
interests.  Peter  Oliver  wrote  of  Samuel  Adams,  for
example, “He was so thorough a Machiavilian, that he
divested  himself  of  every  worthy  Principle,  &  would
stick  at  no  Crime  to  accomplish  his  Ends.”  Some
“Gentlemen  of  influence”  worried  that  resistance  to
Britain would undermine all political institutions and
“introduce Anarchy and disorder and render life and
property here precarious.” Their fears increased when
the Sons of Liberty used intimidation and violence to
uphold the boycotts. One well-to-do New Yorker com-
plained, “No man can be in a more abject state of bond-
age than he whose Reputation, Property and Life are
exposed to the discretionary violence . . . of the com-
munity.”  As  the  crisis  deepened,  such  men  became
Loyalists — so  called  because  they  remained  loyal  to
the British crown.

Many other colonists simply hoped to stay out of
the fray. Some did so on principle: in New Jersey and
Pennsylvania,  thousands  of  pacifist  Quakers  and
Germans resisted conscription and violence out of reli-
gious conviction. Others were ambivalent or confused
about the political crisis unfolding around them. The
delegate  elected  to  New  York’s  Provincial  Congress
from  Queen’s  County,  on  Long  Island,  chose  not  to
attend since “the people [he represented] seemed to be
much  inclined  to  remain  peaceable  and  quiet.”  More
than  three-fourths  of  Queen’s  County  voters,  in  fact,
opposed  sending  any  delegate  at  all.  Many  loyal  or
neutral  colonists  hoped,  above  all,  to  preserve  their
families’  property  and  independence,  whatever  the
outcome of the imperial crisis.

Historians estimate that some 15 to 20 percent of
the  white  population — perhaps  as  many  as  400,000

colonists — were loyal to the crown. Some managed to
avoid  persecution,  but  many  were  pressured  by  their
neighbors  to  join  the  boycotts  and  subjected  to  vio-
lence and humiliation if they refused. As Patriots took
over  the  reins  of  local  government  throughout  the
colonies,  Loyalists  were  driven  out  of  their homes  or
forced  into  silence.  At  this  crucial  juncture,  Patriots
commanded  the  allegiance,  or  at  least  the  acquies-
cence, of the majority of white Americans.

Violence East and West
By 1774, British authority was wavering. At the head-
waters of the Ohio, the abandonment of Fort Pitt left a
power  vacuum  that  was  filled  by  opportunistic  men,
led by a royally appointed governor acting in defiance
of  his  commission.  In  Massachusetts,  the  attempt  to
isolate and punish Boston and the surrounding coun-
tryside backfired as Patriots resisted military coercion.
Violence  resulted  in both  places,  and  with  it  the  col-
lapse of imperial control.

Lord Dunmore’s War
In the years since the end of Pontiac’s Rebellion, at least
10,000  people  had  traveled  along  Braddock’s  and
Forbes’s  Roads  to  the  headwaters  of  the  Ohio  River,
where Fort Pitt had replaced Fort Duquesne during the
Great  War  for  Empire,  and  staked  claims  to  land
around  Pittsburgh  (Map  5.5).  They  relied  for  protec-
tion on Fort Pitt, which remained one of Britain’s most
important  frontier  outposts.  But  the  revenue  crisis
forced General Gage to cut expenses, and in October
1772, the army pulled down the fort’s log walls and left
the  site  to  the  local  population.  Settler  relations  with
the  neighboring  Ohio  Indians  were  tenuous  and  ill-
defined, and the fort’s abandonment left them exposed
and vulnerable.

In  the  ensuing  power  vacuum,  Pennsylvania  and
Virginia both claimed the region. Pennsylvania had the
better claim on paper. It had organized county govern-
ments,  established  courts,  and  collected  taxes  there.
But — in keeping with its pacifist Quaker roots — it did
not organize a militia. In this decision, Virginia’s royal
governor, the Earl of Dunmore, recognized an oppor-
tunity. Appointed to his post in 1771, Dunmore was an
irascible  and  unscrupulous  man  who  clashed  repeat-
edly with the House of Burgesses. But when it suited
him, he was just as willing to defy the crown. In 1773,
he  traveled  to  Pittsburgh,  where,  he  later  wrote,  “the
people  flocked  about  me  and  beseeched  me . . . to

