CHAPTER 5

  The Problem of Empire, 1763–1776

175

Lake Ontario

Fort Ontario

Fort Niagara

Fort Erie

MAP 5.5
The Ohio Country, 1774–1775

The erosion of British imperial
authority caused chaos in the Ohio
country. Pennsylvania and Virginia
each claimed Pittsburgh and the
surrounding countryside, while the
Indian communities on the upper
Ohio increasingly feared colonist
aggression. Their fears were realized
in the summer of 1774, when Lord
Dunmore led a force of Virginia mili-
tia into the valley. After defeating a
Shawnee force in the Battle of Point
Pleasant, many Virginians began sur-
veying and staking claims to land in
the Kentucky bluegrass. In the summer
of 1775, perhaps a dozen new towns
were settled there, in violation of the
Royal Proclamation of 1763 and the
Quebec Act of 1774.

Lake
Huron

ANISHINAABEG

Fort Detroit

POTAWATOMI

Maumee R.

Fort Miami

MIAMI

i

 R.
m
a
Mi

Lake Erie

Fort
Le Boeuf

Fort Venango

Fort
Presque Isle

heny R.

g
e
l
l

A

Fort Pitt

SENECA
DELAWARE
MINGO
ela R.

.

R
o
hi
O

h
a
g
n
o
n
o
M

Fort Sandusky

WYANDOT

Scio
to R

.

n
g
u

Muski
m R.
SHAWNEE

Delaw

a
r
e
R
.

Philadelphia

S
u
s
q
u

ehanna R.
Potomac R.

Delaware
Bay

C

hesapea
ke B

a
y

Ohio R.

Lexington

Boonesborough

Braddock’s Road
Forbes’ Road

0

0

50

100 miles

50

100 kilometers

appoint  magistrates  and  officers  of  militia.”  He  orga-
nized a local militia; soon, men armed by Virginia were
drilling near the ruins of Fort Pitt.

In  the  summer  of  1774,  Dunmore  took  the  next
step. In defiance of both his royal instructions and the
House of Burgesses, he called out Virginia’s militia and
led  a  force  of  2,400  men  against  the  Ohio  Shawnees,
who had a long-standing claim to Kentucky as a hunt-
ing ground. They fought a single battle, at Point Pleasant;
the Shawnees were defeated, and Dunmore and his mili-
tia forces claimed Kentucky as their own. A participant
justified his actions shortly afterward: “When without a
king,” he wrote, “[one] doeth according to the freedom
of his own will.” Years of neglect left many colonists in
the  backcountry  feeling  abandoned  by  the  crown.
Dunmore’s War was their declaration of independence.

Armed Resistance in Massachusetts
Meanwhile,  as  the  Continental  Congress  gathered  in
Philadelphia  in  September  1774,  Massachusetts  was
also defying British authority. In August, a Middlesex
County Congress had urged Patriots to close the exist-
ing royal courts and to transfer their political allegiance
to  the  popularly  elected  House  of  Representatives.
Subsequently,  armed  crowds  harassed  Loyalists  and
ensured Patriot rule in most of New England.

In response, General Thomas Gage, now the mili-
tary governor of Massachusetts, ordered British troops
in Boston in September 1774 to seize Patriot armories

in  nearby  Charlestown  and  Cam bridge.  An  army  of
20,000  militiamen  quickly  mobilized  to  safeguard
other  Massachusetts  military  depots.  The  Concord
town  meeting  raised  a  defensive  force,  the  famous
Minutemen,  to  “Stand  at  a  minutes  warning  in  Case
of alarm.” Increasingly, Gage’s authority was limited to
Boston,  where  it  rested  on  the  bayonets  of  his  3,500
troops.  Meanwhile,  the  Patriot-controlled  Massachu-
setts assembly met in nearby Salem in open defiance of
Parliament, collecting taxes, bolstering the militia, and
assuming the responsibilities of government.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What led to Dunmore’s
War, and why did western
settlers support it?

In London, the colonial secretary, Lord Dartmouth,
proclaimed  Massachusetts  to  be  in  “open  rebellion”
and  ordered  Gage
to  march
against the “rude rabble.” On the
night of April 18, 1775, Gage dis-
patched  700  soldiers  to  capture
colonial  leaders  and  supplies  at
Concord.  However,  Paul  Revere
and a series of other riders warned
Patriots in many towns, and at dawn, militiamen con-
fronted the British regulars first at Lexington and then
at  Concord.  Those  first  skirmishes  took  a  handful  of
lives, but as the British retreated to Boston, militia from
neighboring towns repeatedly ambushed them. By the
end  of  the  day,  73  British  soldiers  were  dead,  174
wounded,  and  26  missing.  British  fire  had  killed  49
Massachusetts  militiamen  and  wounded  39.  Twelve
years  of  economic  and  constitutional  conflict  had
ended in violence.

