176

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

The Second Continental Congress
Organizes for War
A month later, in May 1775, Patriot leaders gathered in
Philadelphia for the Second Continental Congress. As
the  Congress  opened,  3,000  British  troops  attacked
American  fortifications  on  Breed’s  Hill  and  Bunker
Hill overlooking Boston. After three assaults and 1,000
casualties,  they  finally  dislodged  the  Patriot  militia.
Inspired  by  his  countrymen’s  valor,  John  Adams
exhorted  the  Congress  to  rise  to  the  “defense  of
American liberty” by creating a continental army. He
nominated George Washington to lead it. After bitter
debate,  the  Congress  approved  the  proposals,  but,
Adams lamented, only “by bare majorities.”

Congress Versus King George  Despite the blood-
shed in Massachusetts, a majority in the Congress still
hoped  for  reconciliation.  Led  by  John  Dickinson  of
Pennsylvania, these moderates won approval of a peti-
tion  expressing  loyalty  to  George  III  and  asking  for
repeal  of  oppressive  parliamentary  legislation.  But
Samuel  Adams,  Patrick  Henry,  and  other  zealous
Patriots drummed up support for a Declaration of the
Causes and Necessities of Taking Up Arms. Americans
dreaded  the  “calamities  of  civil  war,”  the  declaration
asserted, but were “resolved to die Freemen rather than
to live [as] slaves.” George III failed to exploit the divi-
sions among the Patriots; instead, in August 1775, he
issued  a  Proclamation  for  Suppressing  Rebellion  and
Sedition.

George III, 1771

King George III was a young man of twenty-seven when
the American troubles began in 1765. Six years later, as this
portrait by Johann Zoffany suggests, the king had aged.
Initially, George had been headstrong and tried to impose
his will on Parliament, but he succeeded only in generating
political confusion and inept policy. He strongly supported
Parliament’s attempts to tax the colonies and continued the
war in America long after most of his ministers agreed that
it had been lost. The Royal Collection © 2011 Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth II/The Bridgeman Art Library.

Before  the  king’s  proclamation  reached  America,
the  radicals  in  the  Congress  had  won  support  for  an
invasion of Canada to prevent a British attack from the
north.  Patriot  forces  easily  defeated  the  British  at
Montreal; but in December 1775,
they  failed  to  capture  Quebec
City  and  withdrew.  Meanwhile,
American  merchants  waged  the
financial warfare promised at the
First Continental Congress by cut-
ting off exports to Britain and its
West Indian sugar islands. Parlia-
ment  retaliated  with  the  Prohib-
itory Act, which outlawed all trade with the rebellious
colonies.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the violence
around Boston in the
spring of 1775 affect
proceedings in the Second
Continental Congress?

Fighting in the South  Skirmishes between Patriot
and Loyalist forces now broke out in the southern col-
onies. In Virginia, Patriots ousted Governor Dunmore
and forced him to take refuge on a British warship in
Chesapeake  Bay.  Branding  the  rebels  “traitors,”  the
governor organized two military forces: one white, the

Queen’s  Own  Loyal  Virginians;  and  one  black,  the
Ethiopian Regiment, which enlisted 1,000 slaves who
had  fled  their  Patriot  owners.  In  November  1775,
Dunmore issued a controversial proclamation promis-
ing  freedom  to  black  slaves  and  white  indentured
servants  who  joined  the  Loyalist  cause.  White  plant-
ers  denounced  this  “Diabolical  scheme,”  claiming  it
“point[ed]  a  dagger  to  their  Throats.”  A  new  rising
of  the  black  and  white  underclasses,  as  in  Bacon’s
Rebellion in the 1670s, seemed a possibility. In Fincastle
County in southwestern Virginia, Loyalist planter John
Hiell urged workers to support the king, promising “a
Servant man” that soon “he and all the negroes would
get  their  freedom.”  Frightened  by  Dunmore’s  aggres-
sive  tactics,  Patriot  yeomen  and  tenants  called  for  a
final break with Britain.

In North Carolina, too, military clashes prompted
demands  for  independence.  Early  in  1776,  Josiah
Martin,  the  colony’s  royal  governor,  raised  a  Loyalist
force of 1,500 Scottish Highlanders in the backcountry.
In response, Patriots mobilized the lowcountry militia

