CHAPTER 5

  The Problem of Empire, 1763–1776

177

and, in February, defeated Martin’s army at the Battle
of  Moore’s  Creek  Bridge,  capturing  more  than  800
Highlanders. Following this victory, radical Patriots in
the North Carolina assembly told its representatives to
the Continental Congress to join with “other Colonies
in  declaring  Independence,  and  forming  foreign  alli-
ances.”  In  May,  the  Virginia  gentry  followed  suit:  led
by  James  Madison,  Edmund  Pendleton,  and  Patrick
Henry,  the  Patriots  met  in  convention  and  resolved
unanimously to support independence.

Occupying  Kentucky  Beginning  in  the  spring  of
1775, in the wake of Dunmore’s War, independent par-
ties  of  adventurers  began  to  occupy  the  newly  won
lands of Kentucky. Daniel Boone led one group to the
banks  of  the  Kentucky  River,  where  they  established
the  town  of  Boonesborough;  nearby  was  Lexington,
named  in  honor  of  the  Massachusetts  town  that
had  resisted  the  redcoats  a  few  months  earlier.  The
Shawnees and other Ohio Indians opposed the settlers,
and  colonists  built  their  tiny  towns  in  the  form  of
stations to protect themselves — groups of cabins con-
nected by palisades to form small forts.

These western settlers had confused political loyal-
ties. Many had marched under Dunmore and hoped to
receive  recognition  for  their  claims  from  the  crown.
But as the rebellion unfolded, most recognized that the
Patriots’ emphasis on liberty and equality squared with
their view of the world. They soon petitioned Virginia’s
rebel government, asking it to create a new county that

would  include  the  Kentucky  settlements.  They  had
“Fought and bled” for the land in Dunmore’s War and
now wanted to fight against the crown and its Indian
allies in the Ohio country. Virginia agreed: in 1776, it
organized  six  new  frontier  counties  and  sent  arms
and ammunition to Kentucky. In July, the Continental
Congress followed suit, dispatching troops and arms to
the Ohio River as well.

Thomas Paine’s Common Sense
As military conflicts escalated, Americans were divided
in  their  opinions  of  King  George  III.  Many  blamed
him for supporting oppressive legislation and ordering
armed retaliation, but other influential colonists held
out the hope that he might mediate their conflict with
Parliament.  John  Dickinson,  whose  Letters  did  so
much to arouse Patriot resistance in 1768, nevertheless
believed that war with Great Britain would be folly. In
July 1775, he persuaded Congress to send George III
the  Olive  Branch  Petition,  which  pleaded  with  the
king  to  negotiate.  John  Adams,  a  staunch  supporter
of
infuriated  by  Dickinson’s
waffling.  But  Dickinson  had  many  supporters,  both
inside and outside of Congress. For example, many of
Philadelphia’s  Quaker  and  Anglican  merchants  were
neutrals  or  Loyalists.  In  response  to  their  passivity,
Patriot  artisans  in  the  city  organized  a  Mechanics’
Association  to  protect  America’s  “just  Rights  and
Privileges.”

independence,  was

Daniel Boone Escorting Settlers
Through the Cumberland Gap

In 1775 Daniel Boone led a group of
prospective settlers into Kentucky on
behalf of Richard Henderson, a North
Carolina judge and self-appointed
proprietor of a land speculation
ven ture called the Transylvania Colony.
Henderson’s venture soon collapsed,
but Boonesborough was one of perhaps
a dozen towns founded in Kentucky in
violation of crown policy that summer.
Boone became a folk hero, and in the
mid-nineteenth century George Caleb
Bingham painted this memorable scene.
Using biblical imagery (the woman on
horseback recalls Mary riding into
Beth lehem on a donkey) and dramatic
lighting, Bingham portrays Boone as an
agent of progress bringing civilization to
a howling and dangerous wilderness.
George Caleb Bingham, Daniel Boone
Escort ing Settlers Through the Cumberland
Gap, 1851–52. Oil on Canvas, 36½ x 50¼".
Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum,
Washington University in St. Louis. Gift of
Nathanial Phillips, 1890.

