178

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

With popular sentiment in flux, a single brief pam-
phlet helped tip the balance. In January 1776, Thomas
Paine published Common Sense, a rousing call for inde-
pendence and a republican form of government. Paine
had served as a minor customs official in England until
he was fired for joining a protest against low wages. In
1774,  Paine  migrated  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  met
Benjamin  Rush  and  other  Patriots  who  shared  his
republican sentiments.

In  Common  Sense,  Paine  assaulted  the  traditional
monarchical  order  in  stirring  language.  “Monarchy
and hereditary succession have laid the world in blood
and ashes,” Paine proclaimed, leveling a personal attack
at  George  III,  “the  hard  hearted  sullen  Pharaoh  of
England.”  Mixing  insults  with  biblical  quotations,
Paine  blasted  the  British  system  of  “mixed  govern-
ment” that balanced power among the three estates of
king,  lords,  and  commoners.  Paine  granted  that  the
system “was noble for the dark and slavish times” of the
past,  but  now  it  yielded  only  “monarchical  tyranny
in the person of the king” and “aristocratical tyranny in
the persons of the peers.”

Paine argued for American independence by turn-
ing  the  traditional  metaphor  of  patriarchal  authority
on its head: “Is it the interest of a man to be a boy all his
life?”  he  asked.  Within  six  months,  Common  Sense
had  gone  through  twenty-five  editions  and  reached
hundreds of thousands of people. “There is great talk of
independence,”  a  worried  New  York  Loyalist  noted,
“the  unthinking  multitude  are  mad  for  it. . . . A
pamphlet  called  Common  Sense  has  carried  off . . .

thousands.” Paine urged Americans to create indepen-
dent  republican  states:  “A  government  of  our  own  is
our natural right, ’tis time to part.”

Independence Declared
Inspired  by  Paine’s  arguments  and  beset  by  armed
Loyalists,  Patriot  conventions  urged  a  break  from
Britain.  In  June  1776,  Richard  Henry  Lee  presented
Virginia’s  resolution  to  the  Continental  Congress:
“That these United Colonies are, and of right ought to
be,  free  and  independent  states.”  Faced  with  certain
defeat, staunch Loyalists and anti-independence mod-
erates withdrew from the Congress, leaving committed
Patriots  to  take  the  fateful  step.  On  July  4,  1776,  the
Congress  approved  the  Declaration  of  Independence
(see Documents, p. D-1).

The  Declaration’s  main  author,  Thomas  Jefferson
of  Virginia,  had  mobilized  resistance  to  the  Coercive
Acts with the pamphlet A Summary View of the Rights
of British America (1774). Now, in the Declaration, he
justified  independence  and  republicanism  to  Ameri-
cans  and  the  world  by  vilifying  George  III:  “He  has
plundered  our  seas,  ravaged  our  coasts,  burned  our
towns, and destroyed the lives of our people.” Such a
prince was a “tyrant,” Jefferson concluded, and “is unfit
to be the ruler of a free people.”

Employing  the  ideas  of  the  European  Enlighten-
ment,  Jefferson  proclaimed  a  series  of  “self-evident”
truths: “that all men are created equal”; that they possess
the “unalienable rights” of “Life, Liberty, and the pursuit

Independence Declared

In this painting by John Trumbull,
Thomas Jefferson and the other
drafters of the Declaration (John
Adams of Massachusetts, Roger
Sherman of Connecticut, Robert
Livingston of New York, and
Benjamin Franklin of Pennsylvania)
present the document to John
Hancock, the president of the Second
Continental Congress. One Patriot
observer reported that when the
Declaration was read at a public
meeting in New York City on July 10,
a massive statue of George III was
“pulled down by the Populace” and
its 4,000 pounds of lead melted
down to make “Musquet balls” for
use against the British troops massed
on Staten Island. Yale University Art
Gallery/Art Resource, NY.

