CHAPTER 5

  CHAPTER REVIEW

179

of Happiness”; that government derives its “just powers
from the consent of the governed” and can rightly be
overthrown if it “becomes destructive of these ends.” By
linking  these  doctrines  of  individual  liberty,  popular
sovereignty (the principle that ultimate power lies in
the hands of the electorate), and republican government
with  American  independence,  Jefferson  established
them as the defining political values of the new nation.

For Jefferson, as for Paine, the pen proved mightier
than the sword. The Declaration won wide support in
France and Germany; at home, it sparked celebrations
in rural hamlets and seaport cities, as crowds burned
effigies and toppled statues of the king. On July 8, 1776,
in Easton, Pennsylvania, a “great number of spectators”
heard a reading of the Declaration, “gave their hearty
assent  with  three  loud  huzzahs,  and  cried  out,  ‘May
God long preserve and unite the Free and Independent
States of America.’ ”

SUMMARY
Chapters  4  and  5  have  focused  on  a  short  span  of
time — a mere two decades — and outlined the plot of
a political drama. Act I of that drama, the Great War

for  Empire  discussed  in  Chapter  4,  prompted  British
political  leaders  to  implement  a  program  of  imperial
reform and taxation. Act II, discussed in this chapter, is
full of dramatic action, as colonial mobs riot, colonists
chafe  against  restrictions  on  western  lands,  Patriot
pamphleteers  articulate  ideologies  of  resistance,  and
British  ministers  search  for  compromise  between
claims of parliamentary sovereignty and assertions of
colonial autonomy. Act III takes the form of tragedy:
the once-proud British Empire dissolves into civil war,
an imminent nightmare of death and destruction.

Why  did  this  happen?  More  than  two  centuries
later, the answers still are not clear. Certainly, the lack
of astute leadership in Britain was a major factor. But
British  leaders  faced  circumstances  that  limited  their
actions: a huge national debt and deep commitments
to both a  powerful fiscal-military state and the abso-
lute supremacy of Parliament. Moreover, in America,
decades  of  salutary  neglect  strengthened  Patriots’
demands for political autonomy and economic oppor-
tunity. Artisans, farmers, and aspiring western settlers
all feared an oppressive new era in imperial relations.
The  trajectories  of  their  conflicting  intentions  and
ideas placed Britain and its American possessions on
course for a disastrous and fatal collision.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

Sugar Act of 1764 (p. 155)
vice-admiralty courts (p. 156)
Stamp Act of 1765 (p. 157)
virtual representation (p. 157)
Quartering Act of 1765 (p. 157)
Stamp Act Congress (p. 158)
Sons of Liberty (p. 158)
English common law (p. 159)
natural rights (p. 159)
Declaratory Act of 1766 (p. 160)
Townshend Act of 1767 (p. 161)
nonimportation movement

(p. 161)

committees of correspondence

(p. 168)

Tea Act of May 1773 (p. 168)
Coercive Acts (p. 168)
Continental Congress (p. 169)
Continental Association (p. 171)
Dunmore’s War (p. 175)
Minutemen (p. 175)
Second Continental Congress

(p. 176)

Declaration of Independence

(p. 178)

popular sovereignty (p. 179)

Key People

George Grenville (p. 155)
John Dickinson (p. 159)
Charles Townshend (p. 160)
Lord North (p. 166)
Samuel Adams (p. 166)
Lord Dunmore (p. 174)
Thomas Paine (p. 178)
Thomas Jefferson (p. 178)

