180

PART 3

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  As British administrators sought to increase colo-
nial  revenues  and  tighten  administrative  control,
what might have led them to pursue a less confron-
tational course with the colonies? What factors do
you think are most important in explaining the fail-
ure of compromise?

2.  What kinds of provocation caused colonists to riot
or otherwise act directly, even violently, in defense
law,
of
Enlightenment,  and  republican  ideas  shape  their
thinking as they took action?

interests?  How  did  common

their

3.  What compromises were proposed in the colonies
as alternatives to independence? Why did Patriots
reject them?

4.  THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING  Consider the
events listed under “Work, Exchange, and Technol-
ogy” and “Politics and Power” for the period 1763–
1776  on  the  thematic  timeline  on  page  149.  How
important  were  the  linkages  between  economic
developments and political ones in these years?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  Chapter  4  pre-
sented a turbulent era, marked by social and cul-
tural  conflict  and  imperial  warfare,  during  which
the regions of British North America were dispa-
rate and without unity. Yet by 1776 — only thirteen
years after the Treaty of Paris ending the Great War
for  Empire — thirteen  of  Britain’s  mainland  colo-
nies  were  prepared  to  unite  in  a  Declaration  of
Independence. What happened in that intervening
time to strengthen and deepen colonists’ sense of
common  cause?  As  they  drew  together  to  resist
imperial  authority,  what  political  and  cultural
resources did they have in common?

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  Return to the Paul Revere
engraving  of  the  Boston  Massacre  on  page  167.
This  image  was  an  instrument  of  political  propa-
ganda. What features of the image are most impor-
tant to its political purpose? Consider his depiction
of  both  the  soldiers  and  the  townspeople.  Look,
too, at the buildings surrounding the crowd, espe-
cially the Custom House on the right. List the ways
in which Revere invokes the idea of tyranny in this
image.

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

David Armitage, The Declaration of Independence: A
Global History (2007). Traces the international impact
of the Declaration.

Jack P. Greene and J. R. Pole, eds., A Companion to the
American Revolution (2000). A useful compendium of
short essays on topics related to the Revolution.

Woody Holton, Forced Founders (1999). Considers the
coming of the Revolution in Virginia.

Maya Jasanoff, Liberty’s Exiles (2011). A compelling
narrative of Loyalist experiences in the Revolution.

Andrew O’Shaughnessy, The Men Who Lost America
(2013). A British view of the crisis.

Liberty! The American Revolution (PBS video) and its
companion Web site: pbs.org/ktca/liberty/. A useful
overview of the Revolutionary movement.

