Making War and
Republican Governments
1776–1789

in

When  Patriots

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
How  revolutionary  was  the  Amer-
ican  Revolution?  What  political,
social,  and  economic  changes did  it
produce, and what stayed the same?

Frederick
County,  Maryland,  demanded
his allegiance to their cause in
1776, Robert Gassaway would have none
of it. “It was better for the poor people to
lay  down  their  arms  and  pay  the  duties
and taxes laid upon them by King and Par-
liament than to be brought into slavery and commanded and ordered about [by you],”
he told them. The story was much the same in Farmington, Connecticut, where Patriot
ofﬁcials imprisoned Nathaniel Jones and seventeen other men for “remaining neutral.”
In  Pennsylvania,  Quakers  accused  of  Loyalism  were  rounded  up,  jailed,  and  charged
with treason, and some were hanged for aiding the British cause. Everywhere, the out-
break of ﬁghting in 1776 forced families to choose the Loyalist or the Patriot side.

The Patriots’ control of most local governments gave them an edge in this battle.
Patriot leaders organized militia units and recruited volunteers for the Continental army,
a ragtag force that surprisingly held its own on the battleﬁeld. “I admire the American
troops  tremendously!”  exclaimed  a  French  ofﬁcer.  “It  is  incredible  that  soldiers  com-
posed of every age, even children of ﬁfteen, of whites and blacks, almost naked, unpaid,
and rather poorly fed, can march so well and withstand ﬁre so steadfastly.”

Military service created political commitment, and vice versa. Many Patriot leaders
encouraged Americans not only to support the war but also to take an active role in
government. As more people did so, their political identities changed. Previously, Ameri-
cans had lived within a social world dominated by the links of family, kinship, and locality.
Now, the abstract bonds of citizenship connected them directly to more distant institu-
tions of government. “From subjects to citizens the difference is immense,” remarked
South  Carolina  Patriot  David  Ramsay.  By  repudiating  monarchical  rule  and  raising  a
democratic army, the Patriots launched the age of republican revolutions.

Soon republicanism would throw France into turmoil and inspire revolutionaries in
Spain’s American colonies. The independence of the Anglo-American colonies, remarked
the Venezuelan political leader Francisco de Miranda, who had been in New York and
Philadelphia at the end of the American Revolution, “was bound to be . . . the infallible
preliminary to our own [independence movement].” The Patriot uprising of 1776 set in
motion a process that gradually replaced an Atlantic colonial system that spanned the
Americas with an American system of new nations.

6

C H A P T E R

THE TRIALS OF WAR,
1776–1778

War in the North

Armies and Strategies

Victory at Saratoga

The Perils of War

Financial Crisis

Valley Forge

THE PATH TO VICTORY,
1778–1783

The French Alliance

War in the South

The Patriot Advantage

Diplomatic Triumph

CREATING REPUBLICAN
INSTITUTIONS,
1776–1787

The State Constitutions: How

Much Democracy?

Women Seek a Public Voice

The War’s Losers: Loyalists,

Native Americans, and Slaves

The Articles of Confederation

Shays’s Rebellion

THE CONSTITUTION
OF 1787

The Rise of a Nationalist Faction

The Philadelphia Convention

The People Debate Ratification

182

