184

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

The Trials of War, 1776–1778
The Declaration of Independence appeared just as the
British launched a  full-scale military assault. For two
years,  British  troops  manhandled  the  Continental
army.  A  few  inspiring  American  victories  kept  the
rebellion  alive,  but  during  the  winters  of  1776  and
1777, the Patriot cause hung in the balance.

War in the North
Once  the  British  resorted  to  military  force,  few
Europeans gave the rebels a chance. The population of
Great Britain was 11 million; the colonies, 2.5 million,
20 percent of whom were enslaved Africans. Moreover,
the  British  government  had  access  to  the  immense
wealth generated by the South Atlantic System and the
emerging  Industrial  Revolution.  Britain  also  had  the
most powerful navy in the world, a standing army of
48,000  Britons  plus  thousands  of  German  (Hessian)
soldiers,  and  the  support  of  thousands  of  American
Loyalists and powerful Indian coalitions. In the Caro-
linas,  the  Cherokees  resisted  colonists’  demands  for
their  lands  by  allying  with  the  British,  as  did  four  of
the six Iroquois nations of New York (Map 6.1). In the
Ohio country, Shawnees and their allies, armed by the
British, attacked the new Kentucky settlements.

By contrast, the Americans were economically and
militarily  weak. They  lacked  a  strong  central  govern-
ment and a reliable source of tax revenue. Their new
Continental  army,  commanded  by  General  George
Washington,  consisted  of  18,000  poorly  trained  and
inexperienced recruits.

To  demonstrate  Britain’s  military  superiority,  the
prime minister, Lord North, ordered General William
Howe  to  capture  New  York  City.  His  strategy  was  to
seize control of the Hudson River and thereby isolate
the radical Patriots in New England from the colonies
to  the  south.  As  the  Second  Continental  Congress
declared  independence  in  Philadelphia  in  July  1776,
Howe  landed  32,000  troops — British  regulars  and
German  mercenaries — outside
New  York  City.  In  August  1776,
Howe defeated the Americans in
the  Battle  of  Long  Island  and
forced their retreat to Manhattan
Island.  There,  Howe  outflanked
Washington’s  troops  and  nearly
trapped  them.  Outgunned  and
outmaneuvered, the Continental army again retreated,
eventually  crossing  the  Hudson  River  to  New  Jersey.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Why was control of New
York City Britain’s ﬁrst
military objective in the
emerging war?

B R I T I S H   C A N A D A

Halifax

Nova
Scotia

RHODE
ISLAND

N

W

E

S

A T L A N T I C
O C E A N

MASS.

Boston

VT.

N.H.

MASS.

CONN.

Newport

New York

NEW JERSEY

DELAWARE

MARYLAND

Norfolk

0

0

150

300 miles

150

300 kilometers

L.Ontario

NEW
YORK

L.Erie

Philadelphia

PENNSYLVANIA

VIRGINIA

NORTH
CAROLINA

SOUTH
CAROLINA

Wilmington

Charles Town

Loyalist strongholds
Strongly contested areas
Indians: Loyalist or neutral
Patriot strongholds

GEORGIA

Savannah

A scattering of loyalists could be
found in many areas of Patriot strength.

MAP 6.1
Patriot and Loyalist Strongholds

Patriots were in the majority in most of the thirteen
mainland colonies and used their control of local
governments to funnel men, money, and supplies to
the rebel cause. Although Loyalists could be found in
every colony, their strongholds were limited to Nova
Scotia, eastern New York, New Jersey, and certain areas
in the South. However, most Native American peoples
favored the British cause and bolstered the power of
Loyalist militias in central New York (see Map 6.3) and
in the Carolina backcountry.

By December, the British army had pushed the rebels
across  New  Jersey  and  over  the  Delaware  River  into
Pennsylvania.

From the Patriots’ perspective, winter came just in
time. Following eighteenth-century custom, the British
halted  their  military  campaign  for  the  cold  months,
allowing  the  Americans  to  catch  them  off  guard.  On
Christmas night 1776, Washington crossed the Delaware
River  and  staged  a  successful  surprise  attack  on
Trenton,  New  Jersey,  where  he  forced  the  surrender
of  1,000  German  soldiers.  In  early  January  1777,  the
Continental  army  won  a  small  victory  at  nearby
Princeton (Map 6.2). But these minor triumphs could

