CHAPTER 6

  Making War and Republican Governments, 1776–1789

185

American forces

British forces

(cid:8)

(cid:8)

American victory

British victory

Lake
Huron

0

0

15

30 miles

15

30 kilometers

NEW YORK

.
R
n
o
s
d
u
H

1776

CONN.

.

R

Delaware

NEW
JERSEY

Fort Lee

(cid:8)

(cid:8)

Morristown

(cid:8)

White Plains
Oct. 28–Nov. 1

(cid:8)

Harlem
Heights

Montreal

(cid:8)

Fort St. John

1777

VERMONT

MAINE

BR ITIS H C ANADA

St.LawrenceR.
St.Leger

e
n
y
o
g
r
u
B

Lake Ontario

Fort
Oswego

(cid:9)

NEW YORK

(cid:8)

Fort
Stanwix
(cid:9)
(cid:8)
Oriskany
Aug. 6

Burgoyne
surrenders
Saratoga
Oct. 17
(cid:9)
Fort
Herkimer

Albany

Kingston
Oct. 15
Fort Montgomery
Oct. 6

PENNSYLVANIA

R.

Susquehanna

reR.

West
Point

a
w
a
l
e
D

NEW
JERSEY

Germantown
Oct. 4

(cid:8)

Philadelphia

Brandywine Creek
Sept. 11

(cid:8)

MARYLAND

(cid:8)

R.
Fort Ticonderoga
t
u
c
i
t
c
e
n
n
o
C

NEW
HAMPSHIRE

(cid:8)

Bennington
Aug.15

MASS.

CONN. R.I.

R.
c
i
n
o
t
a
s
u
o
H

.

R
n
o
s
d
u
H

(cid:8)

(cid:8)
(cid:9)

New York

N

W

E

S

Long Island
Aug. 27–30

Chesapeake
Bay

DEL.

Howe

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

0

0

50

100 miles

50

100 kilometers

(cid:8)

Princeton
Jan. 3, 1777

(cid:8)

Trenton
Dec. 26, 1776

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

MAP 6.2
The War in the North, 1776–1777

In 1776, the British army drove Washington’s forces across New Jersey into Pennsylvania. The
Americans counterattacked successfully at Trenton and Princeton and then set up winter
headquarters in Morristown. In 1777, British forces stayed on the offensive. General Howe
attacked the Patriot capital, Philadelphia, from the south and captured it in early October.
Meanwhile, General Burgoyne and Colonel St. Leger launched simultaneous invasions from
Canada. With the help of thousands of New England militiamen, American troops commanded
by General Horatio Gates defeated Burgoyne in August at Bennington, Vermont, and in October
at Saratoga, New York, the military turning point in the war.

not  mask  British  military  superiority.  “These  are  the
times,” wrote Thomas Paine, “that try men’s souls.”

Armies and Strategies
Thanks  in  part  to  General  Howe,  the  rebellion  sur-
vived.  Howe  had  opposed  the  Coercive  Acts  of  1774
and still hoped for a political compromise. So he did
not try to destroy the American army but instead tried
to  show  its  weakness  and  persuade  the  Continental

Congress to give up the struggle. Howe’s restrained tac-
tics cost Britain the opportunity to nip the rebellion in
the bud. For his part, Washington acted cautiously to
avoid a major defeat: “On our Side the War should be
defensive,” he told Congress. His strategy was to draw
the British away from the seacoast, extend their lines of
supply, and sap their morale.

Congress had promised Washington a regular force
of 75,000 men, but the Continental army never reached
even  a  third  of  that  number.  Yeomen,  refusing  to  be

