186

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

The Battle of Princeton

Black smoke from burning buildings partially obscures the sun as the muzzle ﬂash from an American
cannon lights up the battleﬁeld. Pursued by Cornwallis after his surprise attack and victory at nearby
Trenton, Washington (on horseback to the right of the ﬂag) confronted three regiments of redcoats at
Princeton. The Americans had an advantage in numbers and put the British to ﬂight, but only after with-
standing the bayonet charge depicted in the right-center of William Mercer’s painting. Courtesy of the
Historical Society of Pennsylvania Collection Atwater Kent Museum of Philadelphia.

“Haras’d with callouts” that took them away from their
families and farms, would serve only in local militias.
When the Virginia gentry imposed a military draft and
three years of service on propertyless men — the “Lazy
fellows who lurk about and are pests to Society” — they
resisted so fiercely that the legislature had to pay them
substantial bounties and agree to
shorter  terms  of  service.  The
Continental  soldiers  recruited  in
Maryland  by  General  William
Smallwood  were  poor  American
youths  and  older  foreign-born
men,  often  British  ex-convicts
and former indentured servants. Most enlisted for the
$20 cash bonus (about $2,000 today) and the promise
of 100 acres of land.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors made it dif-
ﬁcult for the Continental
Congress to create an
effective army?

Molding  such  recruits  into  an  effective  fighting
force  was  nearly  impossible.  Inexperienced  soldiers
panicked  in  the  face  of  British  attacks;  thousands
deserted, unwilling to submit to the discipline of mili-
tary life. The soldiers who stayed resented the contempt

their officers had for the “camp followers,” the women
who  made  do  with  the  meager  supplies  provided  to
feed and care for the troops. General Philip Schuyler of
New York complained that his troops were “destitute of
provisions, without camp equipage, with little ammu-
nition, and not a single piece of cannon.”

The  Continental  army  was  not  only  poorly  sup-
plied but was also held in suspicion by Radical Whig
Patriots, who believed that a standing army was a threat
to liberty. Even in wartime, they preferred militias to a
professional  fighting  force.  Given  these  handicaps,
Washington  and  his  army  were  fortunate  to  have
escaped an overwhelming defeat.

Victory at Saratoga
After Howe failed to achieve an overwhelming victory,
Lord  North  and  his  colonial  secretary,  Lord  George
Germain, launched another major military campaign
in 1777. Isolating New England remained the primary
goal. To achieve it, Germain planned a three-pronged

