CHAPTER 6

  Making War and Republican Governments, 1776–1789

187

attack converging on Albany, New York. General John
Burgoyne  would  lead  a  large  contingent  of  regulars
south  from  Quebec,  Colonel  Barry  St.  Leger  and  a
force  of  Iroquois  would  attack  from  the  west,  and
General  Howe  would  lead  troops  north  from  New
York City.

Howe  instead  decided  to  attack  Philadelphia,  the
home of the Continental Congress, hoping to end the
rebellion  with  a  single  decisive  blow.  But  instead  of
marching quickly across New Jersey, Howe loaded his
troops onto boats and sailed up the Chesapeake Bay to
attack Philadelphia from the south. The plan worked.
Howe’s  troops  easily  outflanked  the  American  posi-
tions along Brandywine Creek in Delaware and, in late
September,  marched  triumphantly  into  Philadelphia.
However, the capture of the rebels’ capital did not end
the uprising; the Continental Congress, determined to
continue the struggle, fled to the countryside.

Howe’s  slow  campaign  against  Philadelphia  con-
tributed to the defeat of Burgoyne’s army at Saratoga.
Burgoyne’s troops had at first advanced quickly, over-
whelming the American defenses at Fort Ticonderoga
in  early  July  and  driving  south  toward  the  Hudson
River.  Then  they  stalled.  Burgoyne — nicknamed
“Gentle man  Johnny” — was  used  to  high  living  and
had fought in Europe in a leisurely fashion; believing
his  large  army  would  easily  dominate  the  rebels,  he
stopped early each day to pitch comfortable tents and
eat  elaborate  dinners  with  his  officers.  The  American
troops  led  by  General  Horatio  Gates  also  slowed
Burgoyne’s  progress  by  felling  huge  trees  in  his  path
and raiding British supply lines to Canada.

At summer’s end, Burgoyne’s army of 6,000 British
and German troops and 600 Loyalists and Indians was
stuck near Saratoga, New York. Desperate for food and
horses, in August the British raided nearby Bennington,
Vermont,  but  were  beaten  back  by  2,000  American
militiamen.  Patriot  forces  in  the  Mohawk  Valley  also
threw St. Leger and the Iroquois into retreat. Making
matters  worse,  the  British  commander  in  New  York
City recalled 4,000 troops he had sent toward Albany
and  ordered  them  to  Philadelphia  to  bolster  Howe’s
force.  While  Burgoyne  waited  in  vain  for  help,  thou-
sands of Patriot militiamen from Massachusetts, New
Hampshire,  and  New  York  joined  Gates,  blocking
Burgoyne in a series of skirmishes that finally gave the
British  no  avenue  of  escape.  The  Patriots  “swarmed
around the army like birds of prey,” reported an English
sergeant, and in October 1777, they forced Burgoyne to
surrender.

The victory at Saratoga was the turning point of the
war.  The  Patriots  captured  more  than  5,000  British

Joseph Brant

Mohawk chief Thayendanegea, known to whites as Joseph
Brant, was a devout member of the Church of England and
helped to translate the Bible into the Mohawk language. Brant
persuaded four of the six Iroquois nations to support Britain
in the war. In 1778 and 1779, he led Iroquois warriors and
Tory rangers in devastating attacks on American settlements
in the Wyoming Valley of Pennsylvania and Cherry Valley in
New York. In this 1797 portrait, artist Charles Willson Peale
has portrayed Brant with European features. Independence
National Historic Park.

troops and ensured the diplomatic success of American
representatives  in  Paris,  who  won  a  military  alliance
with France.

The Perils of War
The  Patriots’  triumph  at  Saratoga  was  tempered  by
wartime  difficulties.  A  British  naval  blockade  cut  off
supplies of European manufactures and disrupted the
New England fishing industry; meanwhile, the British
occupation  of  Boston,  New  York,  and  Philadelphia
reduced  trade.  As  Patriots,  along  with  unemployed
artisans and laborers, moved to the countryside, New
York City’s population declined from 21,000 to 10,000.
The  British  blockade  cut  tobacco  exports  in  the
Chesapeake, so planters grew grain to sell to the con-
tending armies. All across the land, farmers and arti-
sans adapted to a war economy.

With goods now scarce, governments requisitioned
military  supplies  directly  from  the  people.  In  1776,
Connecticut officials asked the citizens of Hartford to

