188

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

artisans refused to sell their goods. Ultimately, a gov-
ernment  official  admitted,  consumers  had  to  pay  the
higher market prices “or submit to starving.”

The fighting endangered tens of thousands of civil-
ians.  A  British  officer,  Lord  Rawdon,  favored  giving
“free liberty to the soldiers to ravage [the country] at
will,  that  these  infatuated  creatures  may  feel  what  a
calamity  war  is.”  As  British  and  American  armies
marched back and forth across New Jersey, they forced
Patriot  and  Loyalist  families  to  flee  their  homes  to
escape arrest — or worse. Soldiers and partisans looted
farms,  and  disorderly  troops  harassed  and  raped
women and girls. “An army, even a friendly one, are a
dreadful scourge to any people,” wrote one Connecticut
soldier. “You cannot imagine what devastation and dis-
tress mark their steps.”

The war divided many farm communities. Patriots
formed committees of safety to collect taxes and seized
the property of those who refused to pay. “Every Body
submitted to our Sovereign Lord the Mob,” lamented a
Loyalist preacher. In parts of Maryland, the number of
“nonassociators” — those  who  refused  to  join  either
side — was so large that they successfully defied Patriot
mobs.  “Stand  off  you  dammed  rebel  sons  of  bitches,”
shouted Robert Davis of Anne Arundel County, “I will
shoot you if you come any nearer.”

Financial Crisis
Such  defiance  exposed  the  weakness  of  Patriot  gov-
ernments.  Most  states  were  afraid  to  raise  taxes,  so
officials  issued  bonds  to  secure  gold  or  silver  from
wealthy individuals. When those funds ran out, indi-
vidual states financed the war by issuing so much paper
money — some  $260  million  all  told — that  it  lost
worth,  and  most  people  refused  to  accept  it  at  face
value. In North Carolina, even tax collectors eventually
rejected the state’s currency.

The  finances  of  the  Continental  Congress  col-
lapsed,  too,  despite  the  efforts  of  Philadelphia  mer-
chant Robert Morris, the government’s chief treasury
official. Because the Congress lacked the authority to
impose  taxes,  Morris  relied  on  funds  requisitioned
from the states, but the states paid late or not at all. So
Morris  secured  loans  from  France  and  Holland  and
sold  Continental  loan  certificates  to  some  thirteen
thousand  firms  and  individuals.  All  the  while,  the
Congress was issuing paper money — some $200 mil-
lion between 1776 and 1779 — which, like state curren-
cies, quickly fell in value. In 1778, a family needed $7
in Continental bills to buy goods worth $1 in gold or
silver. As the exchange rate deteriorated — to 42 to 1 in

American Militiamen

Beset by continuing shortages of cloth, the Patriot army
dressed in a variety of uniforms and fabrics. This German
engraving, taken from a drawing by a Hessian ofﬁcer, shows
two American militiamen (one of them barefoot) wearing
hunting shirts and trousers made of ticking, the strong linen
fabric often used to cover mattresses and pillows. Anne S. K.
Brown Military Collection, Brown University.

provide  1,000  coats  and  1,600  shirts,  and  soldiers
echoed  their  pleas.  After  losing  all  his  shirts  “except
the  one  on  my  back”  in  the  Battle  of  Long  Island,
Captain Edward Rogers told his wife that “the making
of Cloath . . . must go on.” Patriot women responded;
in  Elizabeth,  New  Jersey,  they  promised  “upwards  of
100,000  yards  of  linnen  and  woolen  cloth.”  Other
women assumed the burdens of farmwork while their
men were away at war and acquired a taste for decision
making. “We have sow’d our oats as you desired,” Sarah
Cobb Paine wrote to her absent husband. “Had I been
master  I  should  have  planted  it  to  Corn.”  Their  self-
esteem  boosted  by  wartime  activities,  some  women
expected  greater  legal  rights  in  the  new  republican
society.

Still,  goods  remained  scarce  and  pricey.  Hard-
pressed  consumers  assailed  shopkeepers  as  “enemies,
extortioners, and monopolizers” and called for govern-
ment  regulation.  But  when  the  New  England  states
imposed  price  ceilings  in  1777,  many  farmers  and

