CHAPTER 6

  Making War and Republican Governments, 1776–1789

189

Paper Currency

Testifying to their independent status, the new state
governments printed their own currencies. Rejecting the
English system of pounds and shillings, Virginia used the
Spanish gold dollar as its basic unit of currency, although
the equivalent in English pounds is also shown. Initially,
$1,200 was equal to £360 — a ratio of 3.3 to 1. By
1781, Virginia had printed so much paper money to
pay its soldiers and wartime expenses that the value
of its currency had depreciated. It now took $40 in
Virginia currency to buy the same amount of goods as
£1 sterling. The American Numismatic Society.

1779, 100 to 1 in 1780, and 146 to 1 in 1781 — it sparked
social upheaval. In Boston, a mob of women accosted
merchant Thomas Boyleston, “seazd him by his Neck,”
and forced him to sell his wares at traditional prices. In
rural Ulster County, New York, women told the com-
mittee of safety to lower food prices or “their husbands
and  sons  shall  fight  no  more.”  As  morale  crumbled,
Patriot leaders feared the rebellion would collapse.

Valley Forge
Fears  reached  their  peak  during  the  winter  of  1777.
While Howe’s army lived comfortably in Philadelphia,
Washington’s army retreated 20 miles to Valley Forge,
where  12,000  soldiers  and  hundreds  of  camp  follow-
ers  suffered  horribly.  “The  army . . . now  begins  to
grow  sickly,”  a  surgeon  confided  to  his  diary.  “Poor
food — hard  lodging — cold  weather — fatigue — nasty
clothes — nasty  cookery. . . . Why  are  we  sent  here  to
starve  and  freeze?”  Nearby  farmers  refused  to  help.
Some were pacifists, Quakers and German sectarians
unwilling to support either side. Others looked out for
their own families, selling grain for gold from British
quartermasters  but  refusing  depreciated  Continental
currency. “Such a dearth of public spirit, and want of
public virtue,” lamented Washington. By spring, more
than 200 officers had resigned, 1,000 hungry soldiers
had deserted, and another 3,000 had died from malnu-
trition and disease. That winter at Valley Forge took as
many American lives as had two years of fighting.

In  this  dark  hour,  Baron  von  Steuben  raised  the
readiness  of  the  American  army.  A  former  Prussian
military  officer,  von  Steuben  was  one  of  a  handful  of
republican-minded foreign aristocrats who joined the
American cause. Appointed as inspector general of the

Continental army, he instituted a strict drill system and
encouraged  officers  to  become  more  professional.
Thanks to von Steuben, the smaller army that emerged
from  Valley  Forge  in  the  spring  of  1778  was  a  much
tougher and better-disciplined force.

The Path to Victory,
1778–1783
Wars are often won by astute diplomacy, and so it was
with the War of Independence. The Patriots’ prospects
improved dramatically in 1778, when the Continental
Congress  concluded  a  military  alliance  with  France,
the most powerful nation in Europe. The alliance gave
the  Americans  desperately  needed  money,  supplies,
and, eventually, troops. And it confronted Britain with
an international war that challenged its domination of
the Atlantic and Indian oceans.

The French Alliance
France and America were unlikely partners. France was
Catholic and a monarchy; the United States was Protes-
tant and a federation of republics. From 1689 to 1763,
the  two  peoples  had  been  enemies:  New  Eng landers
had  brutally  uprooted  the  French  population  from
Acadia (Nova Scotia) in 1755, and the French and their
Indian  allies  had  raided  British  settlements.  But  the
Comte de Vergennes, the French foreign minister, was
determined  to  avenge  the  loss  of  Canada  during  the
Great War for Empire (see Chapter 4) and persuaded
King Louis XVI to provide the rebellious colonies with
a  secret  loan  and  much-needed  gunpowder.  When

