190

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

news of the rebel victory at Saratoga reached Paris in
December 1777, Vergennes sought a formal alliance.

Benjamin Franklin and other American diplomats
craftily exploited France’s rivalry with Britain to win an
explicit commitment to American independence. The
Treaty of Alliance of February 1778 specified that once
France entered the war, neither partner would sign a
separate  peace  without  the  “liberty,  sovereignty,  and
independence”  of  the  United  States.  In  return,  the
Continental Congress agreed to recognize any French
conquests  in  the  West  Indies.  “France  and  America,”
warned  Britain’s  Lord  Stormont,  “were  indissolubly
leagued for our destruction.”

The  alliance  gave  new  life  to  the  Patriots’  cause.
“There  has  been  a  great  change  in  this  state  since
the  news  from  France,”  a  Patriot  soldier  reported
from  Pennsylvania.  Farmers — “mercenary  wretches,”
he called them — “were as eager for Continental Money
now  as  they  were  a  few  weeks  ago  for  British  gold.”
Its  confidence  bolstered,  the  Continental  Congress
addressed the demands of the officer corps. Most offi-
cers  were  gentlemen  who  equipped  themselves  and
raised  volunteers;  in  return,  they  insisted  on  lifetime
military pensions at half pay. John Adams condemned
the officers for “scrambling for rank and pay like apes
for nuts,” but General Washington urged the Congress
to  grant  the  pensions:  “The  salvation  of  the  cause
depends upon it.” The Congress reluctantly granted the
officers half pay, but only for seven years.

Meanwhile,  the  war  had  become  unpopular  in
Britain. At first, George III was determined to crush the
rebellion.  If  America  won  independence,  he  warned
Lord North, “the West Indies must follow them. Ireland
would soon follow the same plan and be a separate state,
then  this  island  would  be  reduced  to  itself,  and  soon
would  be  a  poor  island  indeed.”
Stunned by the defeat at Saratoga,
however,  the  king  changed  his
mind. To thwart an American alli-
ance  with  France,  he  authorized
North to seek a negotiated settle-
ment.  In  February  1778,  North
persuaded Parliament to repeal the Tea and Prohibitory
Acts and, amazingly, to renounce its power to tax the
colonies. But the Patriots, now allied with France and
committed to independence, rejected North’s overture.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What were the most
important results of the
Patriot victory at Saratoga?

War in the South
The  French  alliance  did  not  bring  a  rapid  end  to  the
war. When France entered the conflict in June 1778, it
hoped  to  seize  all  of  Britain’s  sugar  islands.  Spain,

which joined the war against Britain in 1779, aimed to
regain  Florida  and  the  fortress  of  Gibraltar  at  the
entrance to the Mediterranean Sea.

Britain’s Southern Strategy  For its part, the British
government revised its military strategy to defend the
West  Indies  and  capture  the  rich  tobacco-  and  rice-
growing colonies: Virginia, the Carolinas, and Georgia.
Once conquered, the ministry planned to use the Scott-
ish  Highlanders  in  the  Carolinas  and  other  Loyalists
to hold them. It had already mobilized the Cherokees
and Delawares against the land-hungry Americans and
knew  that  the  Patriots’  fears  of  slave  uprisings  weak-
ened  them  militarily  (Map  6.3).  As  South  Carolina
Patriots  admitted  to  the  Continental  Congress,  they
could raise only a few recruits “by reason of the great
proportion of citizens necessary to remain at home to
prevent insurrection among the Negroes.”

The  large  number  of  slaves  in  the  South  made
the  Revolution  a  “triangular  war,”  in  which  African
Americans constituted a strategic problem for Patriots
and  a  tempting,  if  dangerous,  opportunity  for  the
British. Britain actively recruited slaves to its cause. The
effort  began  with  Dunmore’s  controversial  proclama-
tion  in  November  1775  recruiting  slaves  to  his
Ethiopian  Regiment  (see  Chapter  5).  In  1779,  the
Philipsburg Proclamation declared that any slave who
deserted a rebel master would receive protection, free-
dom,  and  land  from  Great  Britain.  Together,  these
proclamations led some 30,000 African Americans to
take  refuge  behind  British  lines.  George  Washington
initially barred blacks from the Continental army, but
he relented in 1777. By war’s end, African Americans
could  enlist  in  every  state  but  South  Carolina  and
Georgia, and some 5,000 — slave and free — fought for
the Patriot cause (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 192).

It fell to Sir Henry Clinton — acutely aware of the
role slaves might play — to implement Britain’s s outh-
ern strategy. From the British army’s main base in New
York  City,  Clinton  launched  a  seaborne  attack  on
Savannah,  Georgia.  Troops  commanded  by  Colonel
Archibald  Campbell  captured  the  town  in  December
1778. Mobilizing hundreds of blacks to transport sup-
plies,  Campbell  moved  inland  and  captured  Augusta
early in 1779. By year’s end, Clinton’s forces and local
Loyalists  controlled  coastal  Georgia  and  had  10,000
troops poised for an assault on South Carolina.

In 1780, British forces marched from victory to vic-
tory (Map 6.4). In May, Clinton forced the surrender of
Charleston, South Carolina, and its garrison of 5,000
troops. Then Lord Charles Cornwallis assumed control
of  the  British  forces  and,  at  Camden,  defeated  an

