MAP 6.3
Native Americans and the
War in the West, 1778–1779

Many Indian peoples remained
neutral, but others, fearing
land-hungry Patriot farmers,
used British-supplied guns to
raid American settlements.
To thwart attacks by militant
Shawnees, Cherokees, and
Delawares, a Patriot militia
led by George Rogers Clark
captured the British fort and
supply depot at Vincennes on
the Wabash River in February
1779. To the north, Patriot
generals John Sullivan and
James Clinton defeated pro-
British Indian forces near Tioga
(on the New York–Pennsylvania
border) in August 1779 and then
systematically destroyed villages
and crops throughout the lands
of the Iroquois.

CHAPTER 6

  Making War and Republican Governments, 1776–1789

191

American forces

British forces

(cid:8)

American victory

N

W

E

S

Lake
Michigan

KankakeeR.

OTTAWA

Ft. Detroit

(cid:9)

St.JosephR.

(cid:9)

Ft. St. Joseph

Hamilton,Oct.–Dec.1778

MaumeeR.

Ft. Miami
Oct. 24, 1778

(cid:9)

 MIAMI

HURON

C l a i m e d   b y   V i r g i n i a

IllinoisR.

M

ississippiR.

MissouriR.

Cahokia
July 9, 1778
Prairie
du Rocher

Kaskaskia
July 4, 1778

R.

skaskia
Clark
Feb.1779

a
K

.

R
h
s
a
b
a
W

.
R
i
m
Mia

Vincennes
(Ft. Sackville)
Dec. 17, 1778
Feb. 25, 1779

(cid:8)

OhioR.

Kent
u
(cid:9)
c
ky
Ft. Nelson
R.
(Louisville)

Harrod’s Town
Green R.

(cid:9)

(cid:9)

Ft. Massac

Ft. Jefferson

0

0

25

50 miles

25

50 kilometers

Lake Ontario

(cid:9)

Ft. Oswego

Lake Erie

E
R
A
AW
L
E
 D

R.

Allegheny

PENNSYLVANIA
Ft. McIntosh

(cid:9)

Muskin

S

cioto

R
.

SHAWNEE

Ft. Henry

(cid:9)

g
u
m
R.

ay–July

(cid:9)

M

1778

R.
ela
h
a
g
n
o
n
o
M
Ft. Randolph

Clark

LickingR.

Boonesborough

Kanawha

R.

BigSandyR.

VIRGINIA

Pittsburgh

(cid:9)

Redstone
Old Fort

otomacR.

P

S.
T
M
Y
N
E
H
G

ALLE

50

100 miles

50

100 kilometers

0

0

Ft. George

(cid:9) (cid:9)

Ft. Anne

(cid:9)

Ft. Stanwix
Ft. Dayton
(cid:9)
(cid:9)
(cid:6)
Ft. Herkimer

MohawkR.
Canajonarie

Oneida
(cid:6)
Onondaga

Schenectady

Schoharie

Albany

MASS.

N

W

E

S

Lake Erie
rench

F

Cr.

Venango

(cid:9)

Ft. Niagara

Cayuga
(cid:6)

Canadasaga
(cid:6) (cid:6)
(cid:6)

Canandaigua
(cid:6)

Genesee
Castle

NEW YORK
(cid:6)
Unadilla

I R O Q U O I S
(cid:6)
Catherine’s Town
Chemung
(cid:6)(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:9)
(cid:6)
Tioga

Newtown
(cid:8)

Ft. Sullivan

Aug. 29, 1779

Cherry
Valley
9
7

Clinton,17
EastBrWestBr.
Delawa
r
e
R.
Minisink

Sullivan,177

Forty Ft.

(cid:9)

9
Wilkes-Barre

Genesee

R.

(cid:6)

Conewango

W
est
(cid:9)
Br.
Ft. Augusta

LehighR.

PENNSYLVANIA

Kingston

CONN.

H
u
d
s
o
n
R.
(cid:9)
West Point
(cid:9)
Stony
Point

R.

Wallkill

Morristown

New
York

Easton

(cid:8)
(cid:6)
(cid:9)

American forces
American victory
Indian village
British forts
Tory and Indian raids

9
7
7
1
,
d
a
e
h
d
o
r
B

Ft. Kittanning

.

(cid:9)
R
y
n
e
h

Alleg

Pittsburgh

S
usq
u
eh
a
n
n
a
R.

American  force  commanded  by  General  Horatio
Gates, the hero of Saratoga. Only 1,200 Patriot militia-
men joined Gates at Camden, a fifth of the number at
Saratoga.  Cornwallis  took  control  of  South  Carolina,
and  hundreds  of  African  Americans  fled  to  freedom
behind  British  lines.  The  southern  strategy  was
working.

Then  the  tide  of  battle  turned.  Thanks  to  another
republican-minded  European  aristocrat,  the  Marquis
de  Lafayette,  France  finally  dispatched  troops  to  the
American  mainland.  A  longtime  supporter  of  the
American cause, Lafayette persuaded King Louis XVI
to send General Comte de Rochambeau and 5,500 men

to Newport, Rhode Island, in 1780. There, they threat-
ened the British forces holding New York City.

Guerrilla  Warfare  in  the  Carolinas  Meanwhile,
Washington dispatched General Nathanael Greene to
recapture  the  Carolinas,  where  he  found  “a  country
that has been ravaged and plundered by both friends
and  enemies.”  Greene  put  local  militiamen,  who  had
been “without discipline and addicted to plundering,”
under  strong  leaders  and  unleashed  them  on  less
mobile British forces. In October 1780, Patriot militia
defeated  a  regiment  of  Loyalists  at  King’s  Mountain,
South Carolina, taking about one thousand prisoners.

