T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

The Black

Soldier’s Dilemma

For African American slaves, the Revolution offered no clear path to freedom.
Some slaves agreed to ﬁght for Britain because of its promise to liberate slaves
who  fought  against  their  masters.  While  some  were  freed,  many  others  died
ﬁghting, were forced into servitude in the army, or even sold into slavery in the
West Indies. Patriots at ﬁrst refused the service of black soldiers, then enlisted
them in small numbers, but always upheld the property rights of masters.

1.  Dunmore’s Proclamation, 1775. Virginia’s Governor
Dunmore issued this proclamation in response to
the emerging rebellion and formed his recruits
into the so-called Ethiopian Regiment.

To defeat such unreasonable Purposes . . . that the
Peace, and good Order of this Colony may be again
restored . . . I have thought fit to issue this my Procla-
mation, hereby declaring, that until the aforesaid good
Purposes can be obtained, I do in Virtue of the Power
and Authority to me given, by His majesty, determine to
execute Martial Law, and cause the same to be executed
throughout this Colony: and to the end that Peace and
good Order may the sooner be [effected], I do require
every Person capable of bearing Arms, to [resort] to His
majesty’s standard, or be looked upon as Traitors to His
[majesty] . . . I do hereby further declare all indentured
Servants, Negroes, or others, (appertaining to Rebels,)
free that are able and willing to bear Arms, they joining
His majesty’s Troops as soon as may be, for the more
speedily reducing this Colony to a proper Sense of
their Duty.

2.  Virginia’s response to Dunmore’s Proclamation,

1775. A month later, Virginia’s General Assembly
issued the following response.

WHEREAS lord Dunmore, by his proclamation, dated
on board the ship William, off Norfolk, the 7th day of
November 1775, hath offered freedom to such able-
bodied slaves as are willing to join him, and take up
arms, against the good people of this colony, giving
thereby encouragement to a general insurrection . . . it is
enacted, that all negro or other slaves, conspiring to rebel
or make insurrection, shall suffer death. . . . We think it
proper to declare, that all slaves who have been, or shall
be seduced, by his lordship’s proclamation, or other arts,
to desert their masters’ service, and take up arms against
the inhabitants of this colony, shall be liable to such pun-
ishment as shall hereafter be directed by the General
Convention. . . . [A]ll such, who have taken this unlawful
and wicked step, may return in safety to their duty, and
escape the punishment due their crimes. . . . And we do

192

farther earnestly recommend it to all humane and benev-
olent persons in this colony to explain and make known
this our offer of mercy to those unfortunate people.

3.  Runaway advertisement, 1775. Titus — or, as he
was later known, Captain Tye of the Ethiopian
Regiment — abandoned his Delaware master in
response to Dunmore’s Proclamation.

Source: Courtesy American Antiquarian Society.

4.  Report of Bernardo de Gálvez, 1780. Fighting

against the British in support of the Patriots, Loui-
siana governor Bernardo de Gálvez raised a mixed
regiment, almost half of whom were slaves and
free people of color from New Orleans. He praised
their efforts in this report of his campaign.

No less deserving of eulogy are the companies of Negroes
and free Mulattoes who were continually occupied in the
outposts, in false attacks, and discoveries, exchanging
shots with the enemy . . . conduct[ing] themselves with
as much valor and generosity as the whites.

5.  Boston King gains his freedom, 1783. In 1780,
Boston King, like many other southern slaves,
escaped to the British army. Here he describes
his experiences at war’s end.

About this time, peace was restored between America
and Great Britain which diffused universal joy among all

