parties except us, who had escaped slavery and taken
refuge in the English army; for a report prevailed at New-
York that all the slaves, in number two thousand, were to
be delivered up to their masters, altho’ some of them had
been three or four years among the English. This dreadful
rumour filled us with inexpressible anguish and terror,
especially when we saw our old masters coming from
Virginia, North-Carolina and other parts and seizing
upon slaves in the streets of New-York, or even dragging
them out of their beds. Many of the slaves had very cruel
masters, so that the thought of returning home with them
embittered life to us. For some days we lost our appetite
for food, and sleep departed from our eyes. The English
had compassion upon us in the day of our distress, and
issued out a Proclamation importing “That all slaves
should be free who had taken refuge in the British lines
and claimed the sanction and privileges of the Proclama-
tions respecting the security and protection of Negroes.”
In consequence of this, each of us received a certificate
from the commanding officer at New-York, which dis-
pelled our fears and filled us with joy and gratitude.

6.  Jehu Grant is re-enslaved, 1778. Jehu Grant of
Narragansett, Rhode Island, was owned by a
Loyalist. In August 1777 he escaped and joined
the Patriot side; ten months later, his master
tracked him down and reclaimed him. In 1837
Grant applied for a pension from the U.S. govern-
ment and supplied the following narrative of his
experience. His application was denied.

[I] enlisted as a soldier but was put to the service of a
teamster in the summer and a waiter in the winter . . .
I was then grown to manhood, in the full vigor and
strength of life, and heard much about the cruel and
arbitrary things done by the British. Their ships lay
within a few miles of my master’s house, which stood
near the shore, and I was confident that my master traded
with them, and I suffered much from fear that I should be
sent aboard a ship of war. This I disliked. But when I saw
liberty poles and the people all engaged for the support
of freedom, I could not but like and be pleased with
such thing (God forgive me if I sinned in so feeling).
And living on the borders of Rhode Island, where whole

companies of colored people enlisted, it added to my
fears and dread of being sold to the British. These con-
siderations induced me to enlist into the American army,
where I served faithful about ten months, when my mas-
ter found and took me home. Had I been taught to read
or understand the precepts of the Gospel, “Servants obey
your master,” I might have done otherwise, notwithstand-
ing the songs of liberty that saluted my ear, thrilled
through my heart.

Sources: (1) Lord Dunmore’s Proclamation, Learn NC, North Carolina Digital History
“Revolutionary North Carolina,” www.learnnc.org; (2) J. N. Brenaman, A History of
Virginia Conventions (Richmond: J. L. Hill Printing Company, 1902), p. 30; (4)
Thomas Truxtun Moebs, Black Soldiers-Black Sailors-Black Ink: Research Guide on
African-Americans in U. S. Military History, 1526–1900 (Chesapeake Bay, Paris: Moebs
Publishing Company, 1994), 1125; (5) Boston King, Book of Negroes (New York, 1783),
in Simon Schama, Rough Crossings: Britain, the Slaves and the American Revolution
(New York: HarperCollins, 2006), 107, 150; (6) Jehu Grant, To Hon. J. L. Edwards,
Commissioner of Pension, 1836, in The Revolution Remembered: Eyewitness Accounts
of the War for Independence, ed. John C. Dann (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1980), 27–28.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Why was Dunmore willing to offer freedom to slaves
(source 1) when they were a recognized form of prop-
erty under the British Empire? What assumptions about
the loyalties of slaves underlie the response of the
Virginia assembly (source 2)?

2.  Why might Louisiana governor Bernardo de Gálvez

(source 4) have made a point of praising the contribu-
tions of black soldiers to the Patriot cause?

3.  Compare the runaway ad for Titus (source 3) and the

narratives of Boston King and Jehu Grant (sources 5 and
6). What goals did British ofﬁcers hope to achieve in
their relations with slaves? What Patriot values trumped
slaves’ individual liberties during and after the war?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Considering these sources along with the chapter contents
and what you’ve learned in class, write a short essay that
explains how the presence of slaves created a “triangular
war” in the South, assesses the choices that individual slaves
had to make during the Revolution, and considers how the
differences in the institution of slavery between northern
and southern colonies shaped slaves’ experiences in the war.

193

