194

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

American forces

British forces

French forces

(cid:8)
(cid:8)

American victory

British victory

0

0

50

100 miles

50

100 kilometers

R.
o
Ohi

KanawhaR.

SusquehannaR.

NEW
YORK

New York

R.
re
a
w
a
l
e
D

PENNSYLVANIA

Potomac

R.

Philadelphia

Washington,1781

 NEW
JERSEY

1
8
7
1
,
d
o
o
H
-
s
e
v
a
r
G

DELAWARE

Chesapeake
Bay

York

MARYLAND

u
a
e
b
m
a
h
c
o
R

(cid:8)

L

afayette

1781
Barras,

N

W

E

S

3
6
7
1
f
o

Line

roclamation

P

S

AIN
T
N
U
O
M

Greene

Charlottesville

JamesR.

Richmond

VIRGINIA

De

Grasse,
178

1

Yorktown
Oct. 1781

NORTH
CAROLINA

ATL A N T I C
O C E AN

H
o
o
d,
1
7
8
1

(Fro
m
A
ntig
u
a)

(
F
r
o
m
W
e
s
t

I

n
d
i
e
s
)

RIDGE
BLUE
Cornwallis,
1780–81

Morgan

(cid:8)

Guilford Court House
March 1781

(cid:8)

Cowpens
Jan. 1781

(cid:8)
Kings Mt.
Oct. 1780

Charlotte

Gates,1780

1
8
7
1
,
s
i
l
l
a
w
n
r
o
C

C
a
p
e

FearR.

Wilmington

Cornwallis,1780

BritishInvasion

Force,1778

(cid:8)

Santee

R.

Camden
Aug. 1780

Augusta

Savannah

R.

SOUTH    CAROLINA

GEORGIA

Charleston
May 1780

(cid:8)

Savannah
Dec. 1778

(cid:8)

MAP 6.4
The War in the South, 1778–1781

Britain’s southern military strategy started well. British forces captured Savannah in December
1778, took control of Georgia during 1779, and vanquished Charleston in May 1780. Over the next
eighteen months, brutal warfare between the British troops and Loyalist units and the Continental
army and militia raged in the interior of the Carolinas and ended in a stalemate. Hoping to break
the deadlock, British general Charles Cornwallis carried the battle into Virginia in 1781. A Franco-
American army led by Washington and Lafayette, with the help of the French ﬂeet under Admiral
de Grasse, surrounded Cornwallis’s forces on the Yorktown Peninsula and forced their surrender.

American guerrillas commanded by the “Swamp Fox,”
General Francis Marion, also won a series of small but
fierce  battles.  Then,  in  January  1781,  General  Daniel
Morgan led an American force to a bloody victory at
Cowpens, South Carolina. In March, Greene’s soldiers
fought Cornwallis’s seasoned army to a draw at North
Carolina’s  Guilford  Court  House.  Weakened  by  this

war of attrition, the British general decided to concede
the Carolinas to Greene and seek a decisive victory in
Virginia. There, many Patriot militiamen had refused
to  take  up  arms,  claiming  that  “the  Rich  wanted  the
Poor to fight for them.”

Exploiting these social divisions, Cornwallis moved
easily through the Tidewater region of Virginia in the

