CHAPTER 6

  Making War and Republican Governments, 1776–1789

195

Francis Marion Crossing the Pedee River

Francis Marion was a master of the ferocious guerrilla ﬁghting that characterized the war in South Carolina.
Though Patriot general Horatio Gates had little conﬁdence in him, Marion led an irregular militia brigade in
several successful attacks. After chasing Marion into a swamp, British general Banastre Tarleton declared,
“As for this damned old fox, the Devil himself could not catch him.” Soon Patriots began calling Marion the
Swamp Fox. In 1851, William T. Ranney painted Marion (on horseback in a white shirt and blue coat) and his
men crossing the Pedee River in ﬂatboats. Ranney included an unidentiﬁed (and possibly ﬁctionalized) black
oarsman. Amon Carter Museum, Fort Worth, Texas, William T. Ranney (1813–1857). Marion Crossing the Peedee, oil on
canvas, 1850.

early summer of 1781. Reinforcements sent from New
York  and  commanded  by  General  Benedict  Arnold,
the  infamous  Patriot  traitor,  bolstered  his  ranks.  As
Arnold and Cornwallis sparred with an American force
led by Lafayette near the York Peninsula, Washington
was informed that France had finally sent its powerful
West Indian fleet to North America, and he devised an
audacious plan. Feigning an assault on New York City,
he secretly marched General Rochambeau’s army from
Rhode Island to Virginia. Simultaneously, the French
fleet took control of Chesapeake Bay. By the time the
British  discovered  Washington’s  s cheme,  Cornwallis
was  surrounded,  his  9,500-man  army  outnumbered
2 to 1 on land and cut off from reinforcement or retreat
by sea. In a hopeless position, Cornwallis surrendered
at Yorktown in October 1781.

The Franco-American victory broke the resolve of
the British government. “Oh God! It is all over!” Lord

North  exclaimed.  Isolated  diplo-
matically in Europe, stymied mil-
itarily  in  America,  and  lacking
public  support  at  home,  the
British  ministry  gave  up  active
prosecution  of  the  war  on  the
American mainland.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What were the keys to
the Patriot victory in the
South?

The Patriot Advantage
How could mighty Britain, victorious in the Great War
for  Empire,  lose  to  a  motley  rebel  army?  The  British
ministry pointed to a series of blunders by the military
leadership.  Why  had  Howe  not  ruthlessly  pursued
Washington’s  army  in  1776?  Why  had  Howe  and
Burgoyne  failed  to  coordinate  their  attacks  in  1777?
Why  had  Cornwallis  marched  deep  into  the  Patriot-
dominated state of Virginia in 1781?

