196

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
Despite being at a clear
disadvantage at the start
of the war, the American
Patriots won. Why?

Historians acknowledge British mistakes, but they
also attribute the rebels’ victory to French aid and the
inspired  leadership  of  George  Washington.  Astutely
deferring to elected officials, Washington won the sup-
port of the Continental Congress and the state govern-
ments.  Confi dent  of  his  military
abilities,  he  pursued  a  defensive
strategy that minimized casualties
and maintained the morale of his
officers  and  soldiers  through  five
difficult years of war. Moreover, the
Patri ots’  control  of  local  govern-
ments  gave  Washington  a  greater
margin  for  error  than  the  British  generals  had.  Local
militiamen provided the edge in the 1777 victory at Sara-
toga and forced Cornwallis from the Carolinas in 1781.
In the end, it was the American people who decided
the outcome, especially the one-third of the white colo-
nists  who  were  zealous  Patriots.  Tens  of  thousands
of these farmers and artisans accepted Continental bills
in payment for supplies, and thousands of soldiers took
them as pay, even as the currency literally depreciated in
their pockets. Rampant inflation meant that every paper
dollar held for a week lost value, imposing a hidden “cur-
rency  tax” on those who accepted the paper currency.
Each individual tax was small — a few pennies on each
dollar. But as millions of dollars changed hands multiple
times,  the  currency  taxes  paid  by  ordinary  citizens
financed the American military victory.

Diplomatic Triumph
After Yorktown, diplomats took two years to conclude
a peace treaty. Talks began in Paris in April 1782, but
the  French  and  Spanish,  still  hoping  to  seize  a  West
Indian island or Gibraltar, stalled for time. Their tactics
infuriated  American  diplomats  Benjamin  Franklin,
John Adams, and John Jay. So the Americans negoti-
ated secretly with the British, prepared if necessary to
ignore the Treaty of Alliance and sign a separate peace.
British ministers were equally eager: Parliament wanted
peace, and they feared the loss of a rich sugar island.

Consequently,  the  American  diplomats  secured
extremely favorable terms. In the Treaty of Paris, signed
in  September  1783,  Great  Britain  formally  recognized
American  independence  and  relinquished  its  claims
to lands south of the Great Lakes and east of the Miss-
issippi River. The British negotiators did not insist on a
separate territory for their Indian allies. “In endeavouring
to  assist  you,”  a  Wea  Indian  complained  to  a  British
general, “it seems we have wrought our own ruin.” The
Cherokees were forced to relinquish claims to 5 million

acres — three-quarters  of  their  territory — in  treaties
with  Georgia,  the  Carolinas,  and  Virginia,  while  New
York and the Continental Congress pressed the Iroquois
and  Ohio  Indians  to  cede  much  of  their  land  as  well.
British officials, like those of other early modern empires,
found  it  easy  to  abandon  allies  they  had  never  really
understood (America Compared, p. 197).

The  Paris  treaty  also  granted  Americans  fishing
rights off Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, prohibited
the British from “carrying away any negroes or other
property,”  and  guaranteed  freedom  of  navigation  on
the  Mississippi  to  American  citizens  “forever.”  In
return, the American government allowed British mer-
chants  to  pursue  legal  claims  for  prewar  debts  and
encouraged the state legislatures to return confiscated
property to Loyalists and grant them citizenship.

In  the  Treaty  of  Versailles,  signed  simultaneously,
Britain  made  peace  with  France  and  Spain.  Neither
American  ally  gained  very  much.  Spain  reclaimed
Florida  from  Britain,  but  not  the  strategic  fortress  at
Gibraltar.  France  received  the  Caribbean  island  of
Tobago,  small  consolation for  a  war  that  had  sharply
raised taxes and quadrupled France’s national debt. Just
six years  later,  cries for  tax  relief  and  political  liberty
would spark the French Revolution. Only Americans
profited handsomely; the treaties gave them indepen-
dence and access to the trans-Appalachian west.

Creating Republican
Institutions, 1776–1787
When  the  Patriots  declared  independence,  they  con-
fronted  the  issue  of  political  authority.  “Which  of  us
shall  be  the  rulers?”  asked  a  Philadelphia  newspaper.
The question was multifaceted. Would power reside in
the  national  government  or  the  states?  Who  would
control  the  new  republican  institutions:  traditional
elites or average citizens? Would women have greater
political and legal rights? What would be the status of
slaves in the new republic?

The State Constitutions:
How Much Democracy?
In May 1776, the Second Continental Congress urged
Americans  to  reject  royal  authority  and  establish
repub lican governments. Most states quickly complied.
“Con sti tutions  employ  every  pen,”  an  observer  noted.
Within six months, Virginia, Maryland, North Caro lina,
New Jersey, Delaware, and Pennsylvania had all ratified

