A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

China’s Growing

Empire

As Britain was losing control of its multiethnic empire in North America, China’s
Qing [pronounced Ching] dynasty was consolidating its authority over border-
lands  peoples  during  the  eighteenth  century.  And  just  as  Europeans  relied  on
ethnographic descriptions of Native Americans to understand the peoples and
territories they hoped to control, Chinese authorities used ethnographic manu-
als that included prose, poetry, and illustrations to make sense of their new sub-
jects.  These  excerpts  from  a  set  of  “Miao  albums”  illustrate  the  cultural
characteristics  they  observed  in,  or  ascribed  to,  one  such  group  of  these  non-
Chinese (or non-Han) peoples.

Bulong (Basket-Repairing) Zhongjia

Gedou Miao

The Bulong Zhongjia are located in Dinfan and Guang-
shun Districts. Their customs are similar to those of the
Kayou. For them, the New Year begins in the twelfth
month. They greet it by striking a bronze drum. When
they dig in the ground and find a drum, they consider it
to be the legacy of Zhuge Liang [an ancient Chinese hero
claimed as a forebear]. The rich must pay a high price to
buy the drum. At funerals, cattle are butchered and
dressed, and relatives and friends are invited. Drinking
from the “ox horn of happiness,” the guests often get drunk
and sometimes even wind up killing each other. The host
does not usually eat meat but only fish and shrimp. After
burial, the grave is covered by an umbrella. By nature the
Bulong are alert and fierce. When coming and going they
carry sharp knives. They will avenge even an angry look.

The Gedou Miao are found in Zhenyuan, Shibing, and
Huangping. They are as good at hunting as the Turen.
Women wear their hair up, inclined toward one side,
with a comb inserted. Their short tunics are collarless,
and their skirts do not reach beyond the knee. They
embroider in five colors on the bust and the sleeves, and
ornament themselves with seashells [shaped] like silk-
worm cocoons, stringing them together like real pearls. If
a man is injured by one of their poisoned arrows he will
die immediately. They are not, however, given to thievery.

Source: From The Art of Ethnography: A Chinese “Miao Album,” translated by David M.
Deal and Laura Hostetler (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2006). Reprinted by
permission of the University of Washington Press.

Nong (Agricultural) Miao

The Nong Miao are located in the Zhenfeng District,
which once belonged to Guangxi. . . . Men shave their
heads and dress just like Han people. Women wear short
tunics and long skirts, and cover their heads with colorful
scarves. They still follow Miao customs. Their nature is
fierce and cruel; they enjoy killing.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  What attributes seemed especially meaningful to the

authors of these descriptions?

2.  Why would the authors have singled out the particular
qualities that are remarked upon here? How does this
compare to the ways in which the British viewed their
Native Americans?

new constitutions, and Connecticut and Rhode Island
had revised their colonial charters to delete references
to the king.

Republicanism meant more than ousting the king.
The Declaration of Independence stated the principle
of popular sovereignty: governments derive “their just
powers from the consent of the governed.” In the heat
of revolution, many Patriots gave this clause a further
democratic twist. In North Carolina, the backcountry
farmers  of  Mecklenburg  County  told  their  delegates
to  the  state’s  constitutional  convention  to  “oppose

everything  that  leans  to  aristocracy  or  power  in  the
hands  of  the  rich.”  In  Virginia,  voters  elected  a  new
assembly  in  1776  that,  an  eyewitness  remarked,  “was
composed  of  men  not  quite  so  well  dressed,  nor  so
politely educated, nor so highly born” as colonial-era
legislatures (Figure 6.1).

To see a longer excerpt of the Mecklenburg dele-
gates’ document, along with other primary sources
from this period, see Sources for America’s History.

197

