198

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

North

South

1765–1775

36%

47%

17%

1783–1790

12% 26%

62%

1765–1775

52%

36%

1783–1790

28%

42%

12%

30%

Over £5,000

£2,000– £5,000

Under £2,000

Pennsylvania’s  Controversial  Constitution  This
democratic impulse flowered in Pennsylvania, thanks
to a coalition of Scots-Irish farmers, Philadelphia arti-
sans,  and  Enlightenment-influenced  intellectuals.  In
1776, these insurgents ousted every officeholder of the
Penn family’s proprietary government, abolished prop-
erty ownership as a qualification for voting, and granted
all taxpaying men the right to vote and hold office. The
Pennsylvania constitution of 1776 also created a uni-
cameral (one-house) legislature with complete power;
there was no governor to exercise a veto. Other provi-
sions mandated a system of elementary education and
protected citizens from imprisonment for debt.

Pennsylvania’s  democratic  constitution  alarmed
many  leading  Patriots.  From  Boston,  John  Adams
denounced  the  unicameral  legislature  as  “so  demo-
it  must  produce
cratical  that
confusion  and  every  evil  work.”
Along  with  other  conservative
Patriots, Adams wanted to restrict
office holding to “men of learning,
leisure  and  easy  circumstances”
and  warned  of  oppression  under
majority  rule:  “If  you  give  [ordi-
nary  citizens]  the  command  or
preponderance in the . . . legislature, they will vote all
property out of the hands of you aristocrats.”

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
What aspects of the
Pennsylvania constitution
were most objectionable
to Adams, and what did he
advocate instead?

Tempering Democracy  To counter the appeal of the
Pennsylvania constitution, Adams published Thoughts
on Government (1776). In that treatise, he adapted the
British Whig theory of mixed government (a sharing
of power among the monarch, the House of Lords, and
the  Commons)  to  a  republican  society.  To  disperse
authority and preserve liberty, he insisted on separate
institutions: legislatures would make laws, the execu-
tive would administer them, and the judiciary would

FIGURE 6.1
Middling Men Enter the Halls of Government,
1765–1790

Before the Revolution, wealthy men (with assets of
£2,000 or more, as measured by tax lists and probate
records) dominated most colonial assemblies. The
power of money was especially apparent in the
southern colonies, where representatives worth at
least £5,000 formed a majority of the legislators.
However, in the new American republic, the propor-
tion of middling legislators (yeomen farmers and
others worth less than £2,000) increased dramati-
cally, especially in the northern states. Adapted from
Jackson T. Main, “Government by the People: The American
Revolution and the Democratization of the Legislatures,” by
Jackson T. Main in William and Mary Quarterly, series 3, 23
(1966). Used by permission of William and Mary Quarterly,
Omohundro Institute of Early History and Culture.

enforce them. Adams also demanded a bicameral (two-
house)  legislature  with  an  upper  house  of  substantial
property owners to offset the popular majorities in the
lower  one.  As  further  curbs  on  democracy,  he  pro-
posed  an  elected  governor  with  veto  power  and  an
appointed — not elected — judiciary.

Conservative  Patriots  endorsed  Adams’s  govern-
mental  system.  In  New  York’s  constitution  of  1777,
property qualifications for voting excluded 20 percent
of white men from assembly elections and 60 percent
from  casting  ballots  for  the  governor  and  the  upper
house. In South Carolina, elite planters used property
rules to disqualify about 90 percent of white men from
office holding. The 1778  constitution required candi-
dates for governor to have a debt-free estate of £10,000
(about  $700,000  today),  senators  to  be  worth  £2,000,
and  assemblymen  to  own  property  valued  at  £1,000.
Even  in  traditionally  democratic  Massachusetts,  the
1780 constitution, authored primarily by Adams, raised
property  qualifications  for  voting  and  office  holding
and skewed the lower house toward eastern, mercantile
interests.

The political legacy of the Revolution was complex.
Only  in  Pennsylvania  and  Vermont  were  radical
Patriots able to create truly democratic institutions. Yet
in  all  the  new  states,  representative  legislatures  had
acquired  more  power,  and  average  citizens  now  had
greater power at the polls and greater influence in the
halls of government.

Women Seek a Public Voice
The  extraordinary  excitement  of  the  Revolutionary
era  tested  the  dictum  that  only  men  could  engage
in  politics.  Men  controlled  all  public  institutions —
legislatures,  juries,  government  offices — but  upper-
class women engaged in political debate and, defying

