CHAPTER 6

  Making War and Republican Governments, 1776–1789

199

men’s scorn, filled their letters, diaries, and conversa-
tions with opinions on public issues. “The men say we
have  no  business  [with  politics],”  Eliza  Wilkinson  of
South Carolina complained in 1783. “They won’t even
allow us liberty of thought, and that is all I want.”

As Wilkinson’s remark suggests, most women did
not insist on civic equality with men; many sought only
an end to restrictive customs and laws. Abigail Adams
demanded equal legal rights for married women, who
under common law could not own property, enter into
contracts, or initiate lawsuits. The war bonds she pur-
chased had to be held in a trust run by a male relative.
“Men would be tyrants” if they continued to hold such
power over women, Adams declared to her husband,
John,  criticizing  him  and  other  Patriots  for  “emanci-
pating all nations” from monarchical despotism while
“retaining absolute power over Wives.”

Most  politicians  ignored  women’s  requests,  and
most  men  insisted  on  traditional  sexual  and  political
prerogatives. Long-married husbands remained patri-
archs  who  dominated  their  households,  and  even
young  men  who  embraced  the  republican  ideal  of
“companionate marriage” did not support legal equal-
ity for their wives and daughters. Except in New Jersey,
which  until  1807  allowed  unmarried  and  widowed
female property holders to vote, women remained dis-
enfranchised.  In  the  new  American  republic,  only
white men enjoyed full citizenship.

Nevertheless, the republican belief in an educated
citizenry  created  opportunities  for  some  women.  In
her 1779 essay “On the Equality of the Sexes,” Judith
Sargent  Murray  argued  that  men  and  women  had
equal  capacities  for  memory  and  that  women  had
superior
imaginations.  She  conceded  that  most
women were inferior to men in judgment and reason-
ing, but only from lack of training: “We can only rea-
son from what we know,” she argued, and most women
had been denied “the opportunity of acquiring knowl-
edge.” That situation changed in the 1790s, when the
attorney  general  of  Massachusetts  declared  that  girls
had an equal right to schooling under the state consti-
tution. By 1850, the literacy rates of women and men
in  the  northeastern  states  were  equal,  and  educated
women  again  challenged  their  subordinate  legal  and
political status.

The War’s Losers: Loyalists, Native
Americans, and Slaves
The  success  of  republican  institutions  was  assisted
by  the  departure  of  as  many  as  100,000  Loyalists,
many of whom suffered severe financial losses. Some
Patriots demanded revolutionary justice: the seizure of

Judith Sargent Murray

Judith Sargent Murray was perhaps the most accomplished
female essayist of the Revolutionary era. Publishing under
various pen names, she advocated for economic indepen-
dence and better educational opportunities for women.
Two years before Mary Wollstonecraft’s A Vindication of the
Rights of Woman (1792), she published “On the Equality of
the Sexes” in the Massachusetts Magazine. Her letter books,
which run to twenty volumes, were discovered only in 1984;
the Judith Sargent Murray Society (jsmsociety.com) is now
transcribing and indexing them for publication. This striking
portrait by John Singleton Copley hints at her intelligence
and sardonic wit. Terra Foundation for American Art, Chicago/Art
Resource, NY.

all  Loyalist  property  and  its  distribution  to  needy
Americans. But most officials were unwilling to go so
far.  When  state  governments  did  seize  Loyalist  prop-
erty,  they  often  auctioned  it  to  the  highest  bidders;
only rarely did small-scale farmers benefit. In the cit-
ies,  Patriot  merchants  replaced
Loyalists  at  the  top  of  the  eco-
nomic ladder, supplanting a tradi-
tional economic elite — who often
invested profits from trade in real
estate — with  republican  entre-
preneurs who tended to promote
new  trading  ventures  and  domestic  manufacturing.
This shift facilitated America’s economic development
in the years to come.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What impact did republi-
can ideals have on gender
roles and expectations dur-
ing the Revolutionary era?

