200

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

entrepreneurs

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the Revolutionary
commitment to liberty and
the protection of property
affect enslaved African
Americans and western
Indians?

Though  the  Revolution  did  not  result  in  wide-
spread  property  redistribution,  it  did  encourage  yeo-
men,  middling  planters,  and
small-time
to
believe that their new republican
governments would protect their
property  and  ensure  widespread
access  to  land.  In  western  coun-
ties, former Regulators demanded
that  the  new  governments  be
more  responsive  to  their  needs;
beyond  the  Appalachians,  thou-
sands of squatters who had occupied lands in Kentucky
and Tennessee expected their claims to be recognized
and  lands  to  be  made  available  on  easy  terms.  If  the
United States were to secure the loyalty of westerners, it
would have to meet their needs more effectively than
the British Empire had.

This  meant,  among  other  things,  extinguishing
Native American claims to land as quickly as possible.

A Black Loyalist Pass, 1783

White Patriots claimed their freedom by ﬁghting against the
British; thousands of black slaves won their liberty by ﬁghting
for them. This pass certiﬁes that Cato Rammsay (actually
Ramsey), “a Negro, resorted to the British Lines” in search of
the freedom promised by Virginia royal governor Dunmore
and British commander Henry Clinton to slaves who escaped
from Patriot owners. Now age forty-ﬁve and a “slim fellow,”
Ramsey had escaped from his owner, John Ramsey of Norfolk,
Virginia, in 1776, probably ﬂeeing to Dunmore’s ships. Seven
years later, he ended up in New York, reunited with his wife,
China Godfrey (thirty-ﬁve), and their three children: James
(twenty), Betsey (ﬁfteen), and Nelly Ramsey (ten), who had
ﬂed subsequently from other owners. As the British evacu-
ated New York in 1783, Ramsey and his family were free “to
go to Nova-Scotia,” where they worked as farmers. Nova
Scotia Archives and Records Management.

At war’s end, George Washington commented on the
“rage  for  speculating”  in  Ohio  Valley  lands.  “Men  in
these times, talk with as much facility of fifty, a hun-
dred, and even 500,000 Acres as a Gentleman formerly
would do of 1000 acres.” “If we make a right use of our
natural advantages,” a Fourth of July orator observed,
“we  soon  must  be  a  truly  great  and  happy  people.”
Native  American  land  claims  stood  as  a  conspicuous
barrier to the “natural advantages” he imagined.

For  southern  slaveholders,  the  Revolution  was
fought  to  protect  property  rights,  and  any  sentiment
favoring slave emancipation met with violent objections.
When Virginia Methodists called for general emancipa-
tion in 1785, slaveholders used Revolutionary principles
to  defend  their right  to  human  property. They  “risked
[their] Lives and Fortunes, and waded through Seas of
Blood”  to  secure  “the  Possession  of  [their]  Rights  of
Liberty and Property,” only to hear of “a very subtle and
daring  Attempt”  to  “dispossess  us  of  a  very  important
Part of our Property.” Emancipation would bring “Want,
Poverty, Distress, and Ruin to the Free Citizen.” The lib-
erties coveted by ordinary white Americans bore hard
on the interests of Native Americans and slaves.

The Articles of Confederation
As Patriots embraced independence in 1776, they envi-
sioned  a  central  government  with  limited  powers.
Carter  Braxton  of  Virginia  thought  the  Continental
Congress  should  “regulate  the  affairs  of  trade,  war,
peace,  alliances,  &c.”  but  “should  by  no  means  have
authority  to  interfere  with  the  internal  police  [gover-
nance] or domestic concerns of any Colony.”

That idea informed the Articles of Confederation,
which were approved by the Continental Congress in
November  1777.  The  Articles  provided  for  a  loose
union in which “each state retains its sovereignty, free-
dom, and independence.” As an association of equals,
each state had one vote regardless of its size, popula-
tion, or wealth. Important laws needed the approval of
nine of the thirteen states, and changes in the Articles
required unanimous consent. Though the Confedera-
tion had significant powers on paper — it could declare
war, make treaties with foreign nations, adjudicate dis-
putes between the states, borrow and print money, and
requisition  funds  from  the  states  “for  the  common
defense or general welfare” — it had major weaknesses
as well. It had neither a chief executive nor a judiciary.
Though  it  could  make  treaties,  it  could  not  enforce
their  provisions,  since  the  states  remained  sovereign.
Most important, it lacked the power to tax either the
states or the people.

