CHAPTER 6

  Making War and Republican Governments, 1776–1789

201

Although  the  Congress  exercised  authority  from
1776 — raising  the  Continental  army,  negotiating  the
treaty with France, and financing the war — the Articles
won  formal  ratification  only  in  1781.  The  delay
stemmed from conflicts over western lands. The royal
charters of Virginia, Massachusetts, Connecticut, and
other  states  set  boundaries  stretching  to  the  Pacific
Ocean. States  without western lands — Maryland and
Pennsylvania — refused to accept the Articles until the
land-rich  states  relinquished  these  claims  to  the
Confederation.  Threatened  by  Cornwallis’s  army  in
1781,  Virginia  gave  up  its  claims,  and  Maryland,  the
last holdout, finally ratified the Articles (Map 6.5).

Continuing Fiscal Crisis  By 1780, the central gov-
ernment was nearly bankrupt, and General Washington
called  urgently  for  a  national  tax  system;  without
one,  he  warned,  “our  cause  is  lost.”  Led  by  Robert
Morris,  who  became  superintendent  of  finance  in
1781, nationalist-minded Patriots tried to expand the
Confederation’s authority. They persuaded Congress to
charter the Bank of North America, a private institu-
tion  in  Philadelphia,  arguing  that  its  notes  would
stabilize the inflated Continental currency. Morris also
created  a  central  bureaucracy  to  manage  the  Con-
feder ation’s  finances  and  urged  Congress  to  enact  a
5  percent  import  tax.  Rhode  Island  and  New  York
rejected the tax proposal. His state had opposed British
import duties, New York’s representative declared, and
it would not accept them from Congress. To raise reve-
nue, Congress looked to the sale of western lands. In
1783, it asserted that the recently signed Treaty of Paris
had extinguished the Indians’ rights to those lands and
made them the property of the United States.

The  Northwest  Ordinance  By  1784,  more  than
thirty thousand settlers had already moved to Kentucky
and  Tennessee,  despite  the  uncertainties  of  frontier
warfare, and after the war their numbers grew rapidly.
In  that  year,  the  residents  of  what  is  now  eastern
Tennessee organized a new state, called it Franklin, and
sought admission to the Confederation. To preserve its
authority over the West, Congress refused to recognize
Franklin.  Subsequently,  Congress  created  the  South-
west  and  Mississippi  Territories  (the  future  states  of
Tennessee,  Alabama,  and  Mississippi)  from  lands
ceded by North Carolina and Georgia. Because these
cessions carried the stipulation that “no regulation . . .
shall  tend  to  emancipate  slaves,”  these  states  and  all
those south of the Ohio River allowed human bondage.
However,  the  Confederation  Congress  banned
slavery  north  of  the  Ohio  River.  Between  1784  and

1787, it issued three important ordinances organizing
the “Old Northwest.” The Ordinance of 1784, written
by  Thomas  Jefferson,  established
the principle that territories could
become states as their populations
grew.  The  Land  Ordinance  of
1785  mandated  a  rectangular-
grid  system  of  surveying  and
specified a minimum price of $1
an acre. It also required that  half
of  the  townships  be  sold  in  single  blocks  of  23,040
acres  each,  which  only  large-scale  speculators  could
afford,  and  the  rest  in  parcels  of  640  acres  each,
which  restricted  their  sale  to  well-to-do  farmers
(Map 6.6).

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
In what ways did the
Confederation function
effectively, and what were
its greatest failings?

Finally, the  Northwest  Ordinance  of  1787 created
the territories that would eventually become the states
of  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois,  Michigan,  and  Wisconsin.
The ordinance prohibited slavery and earmarked funds
from land sales for the support of schools. It also spec-
ified  that  Congress  would  appoint  a  governor  and
judges to administer each new territory until the pop-
ulation reached  5,000  free  adult  men,  at  which point
the citizens could elect a territorial legislature. When
the  population  reached  60,000,  the  legislature  could
devise a republican constitution and apply to join the
Confederation.

The  land  ordinances  of  the  1780s  were  a  great
and  enduring  achievement  of  the  Confederation
Congress.  They  provided  for  orderly  settlement  and
the  admission  of  new  states  on  the  basis  of  equality;
there would be no politically dependent “colonies” in
the West. But they also extended the geographical divi-
sion between slave and free areas that would haunt the
nation  in  the  coming  decades.  And  they  implicitly
invalidated  Native  American  claims  to  an  enormous
swath  of  territory — a  corollary  that  would  soon  lead
the newly independent nation, once again, into war.

Shays’s Rebellion
Though  many  national  leaders  were  optimistic  about
the long-term prospects of the United States, postwar
economic  conditions  were  grim.  The  Revolution had
crippled American shipping and cut exports of tobacco,
rice,  and  wheat.  The  British  Navigation  Acts,  which
had nurtured colonial commerce, now barred Ameri-
cans  from  legal  trade  with  the  British  West  Indies.
Moreover, low-priced British manufactures (and some
from India as well) were flooding American markets,
driving urban artisans and wartime textile firms out of
business.

