202

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

L.Superior

N O R T H W E S T

C A N A D A

Claimed by U.S.
& Great Britain

t.LawrenceR.

S

MAINE
(part of
MASS.)

VERMONT
(Claimed by
N.H. & N.Y.
Ceded 1791)

Claimed by Virginia
Ceded 1784

n
a
g
i
h
c
i
M
L

.

L.

Huro

n

L.Erie

       T E R R I T O R Y

Western Reserve
Claimed by CONN.
Ceded 1800

Claimed by Virginia
Ceded 1784

Claimed by
MASS. and VA.
Ceded 1784–1785

Claimed by
CONN. and VA.
Ceded 1784–1786

MissouriR.

L O U I S I A N A
Ceded by Spain
to France 1800

ArkansasR.

R.
pi

Mississip

OhioR.
Ceded by Virginia 1789
(KENTUCKY)

(cid:10)

Claimed by North Carolina
Ceded 1790
(TENNESSEE)

VIRGINIA

Cumberland
Gap

NORTH
CAROLINA

SOUTH
CAROLINA

Claimed by S.C.
Ceded 1787

Claimed by Georgia
Ceded 1802

Ceded by Spain
1795

GEORGIA

NEW YORK
Susquehanna R.

NEW HAMPSHIRE

MASSACHUSETTS

L.Ontario
Claimed by
MASS.
Ceded to N.Y.,
1786

Claimed by
CONN.

PENNSYLVANIA

RHODE ISLAND

CONNECTICUT

NEW JERSEY

DELAWARE

MARYLAND

N

W

E

S

A T L A N T I C
O C E A N

Boundary of territory
ceded by New York, 1782
Boundary of territory
ceded by Virginia, 1784
Original thirteen states
after their cessions

States without land claims

Land claims

S P A N I S H FLORID

A

G u l f   o f   M e x i c o

0

0

200

400 miles

200

400 kilometers

MAP 6.5
The Confederation and Western Land Claims, 1781–1802

The Congress formed by the Articles of Confederation had to resolve conﬂicting state claims
to western lands. For example, the territories claimed by New York and Virginia on the basis of
their royal charters overlapped extensively. Beginning in 1781, the Confederation Congress and,
after 1789, the U.S. Congress persuaded all of the states to cede their western claims, creating a
“national domain” open to all citizens. In the Northwest Ordinance (1787), the Congress divided
the domain north of the Ohio River into territories and set up democratic procedures by which
they could eventually join the Union as states. South of the Ohio River, the Congress allowed the
existing southern states to play a substantial role in settling the ceded lands.

The fiscal condition of the state governments was
dire, primarily because of war debts. Well-to-do mer-
chants and landowners (including Abigail Adams) had
invested  in  state  bonds  during  the  war;  others  had
speculated  in  debt  certificates,  buying  them  on  the
cheap  from  hard-pressed  farmers  and  soldiers.  Now

creditors  and  speculators  demanded  that  the  state
governments redeem the bonds and certificates quickly
and at full value, a policy that would require tax increases
and a decrease in the amount of paper currency. Most
legislatures — now  including  substantial  numbers  of
middling farmers and artisans — refused. Instead they

