204

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

authorized new issues of paper currency and allowed
debtors  to  pay  private  creditors  in  installments.
Although  wealthy  men  deplored  these  measures  as
“intoxicating Draughts of Liberty” that destroyed “the
just rights of creditors,” such political intervention pre-
vented social upheaval.

In  Massachusetts,  however,  the  new  constitution
placed  power  in  the  hands  of  a  mercantile  elite  that
owned the bulk of the state’s war bonds. Ignoring the
interests of ordinary citizens, the legislature increased
taxes fivefold to pay off wartime debts — and it stipu-
lated that they be paid in hard currency. Even for sub-
stantial  farmers,  this  was  a  crushing  burden.  When
cash-strapped farmers could not pay both their taxes
and their debts, creditors threatened lawsuits. Debtor
Ephraim  Wetmore  heard  a  rumor  that  merchant
Stephan Salisbury “would have my Body Dead or Alive
in case I did not pay.” To protect their livelihoods, farm-
ers called extralegal conventions to protest high taxes
and  property  seizures.  Then  mobs  of  angry  farmers,
including  men  of  high  status,  closed  the  courts  by
force.  “[I]  had  no  Intensions  to  Destroy  the  Publick
Govern ment,” declared Captain Adam Wheeler, a for-
mer  town  selectman;  his  goal  was  simply  to  prevent
“Valuable and Industrious members of Society [being]
dragged from their families to prison” because of their
debts. These crowd actions grew into a full-scale revolt
led  by  Captain  Daniel  Shays,  a  Continental  army
veteran.

As a revolt against taxes imposed by an unrespon-
sive government, Shays’s Rebellion resembled American
resistance to the British Stamp Act. Consciously link-
ing themselves to the Patriot movement, Shays’s men
placed  pine  twigs  in  their  hats  just  as  Continental
troops had done. “The people have turned against their
teachers the doctrines which were inculcated to effect
the  late  revolution,”  complained  Fisher  Ames,  a  con-
servative Massachusetts lawmaker. Some of the radical
Patri ots  of  1776  likewise  condemned  the  Shaysites:
“[Men  who]  would  lessen  the
Weight  of  Government  lawfully
exercised must be Enemies to our
happy  Revolution  and  Common
Liberty,”  charged  Samuel  Adams.
To  put  down  the  rebellion,  the
Massachusetts  legislature  passed
the Riot Act, and wealthy bond holders equipped a for-
midable fighting force, which Governor James Bowdoin
used to disperse Shays’s ragtag army during the winter
of 1786–1787.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
How did the Shaysites
draw on the Revolution for
inspiration?

Although  Shays’s  Rebellion  failed,  it  showed  that
many  middling  Patriot  families  felt  that  American

oppressors had replaced British tyrants. Massachusetts
voters  turned  Governor  Bowdoin  out  of  office,  and
debt-ridden farmers in New York, northern Pennsyl-
vania, Connecticut, and New Hampshire closed court-
houses  and  forced  their  governments  to  provide
economic  relief.  British  officials  in  Canada  predicted
the imminent demise of the United States; and Ameri-
can  leaders  urged  purposeful  action  to  save  their
republican  experiment.  Events
in  Massachusetts,
declared  nationalist  Henry  Knox,  formed  “the  stron-
gest arguments possible” for the creation of “a strong
general government.”

The Constitution of 1787
These issues ultimately led to the drafting of a national
constitution.  From  its  creation,  the  U.S.  Constitution
was a controversial document, both acclaimed for solv-
ing the nation’s woes and condemned for perverting its
republican principles. Critics charged that republican
institutions worked only in small political units — the
states. Advocates replied that the Consti tution extended
republicanism by adding another level of government
elected  by  the  people.  In  the  new  two-level  political
federation  created  by  the  Constitution,  the  national
government would exercise limited, delegated powers,
and  the  existing  state  governments  would  retain
authority over all other matters.

The Rise of a Nationalist Faction
Money questions — debts, taxes, and tariffs — dominated
the postwar political agenda. Americans who had served
the  Confederation  as  military  officers,  officials,  and
diplomats viewed these issues from a national perspec-
tive  and  advocated  a  stronger  central  government.
George Washington, Robert Morris, Benjamin Franklin,
John Jay, and John Adams wanted Congress to control
foreign  and  interstate  commerce  and  tariff  policy.
However, lawmakers in Massachusetts, New York, and
Pennsylvania — states  with  strong  commercial  tradi-
tions — insisted  on controlling their own tariffs, both
to protect their artisans from low-cost imports and to
assist  their  merchants.  Most  southern  states  opposed
tariffs  because  planters  wanted  to  import  British  tex-
tiles and ironware at the lowest possible prices.

Nonetheless, some southern leaders became nation-
al ists because their state legislatures had cut taxes and
refused  to  redeem  state  war  bonds.  Such  policies,
lamented wealthy bondholder Charles Lee of Virginia,
led taxpayers to believe they would “never be compelled

