CHAPTER 6

  Making War and Republican Governments, 1776–1789

205

to  pay”  the  public  debt.  Creditors  also  condemned
state laws that “stayed” (delayed) the payment of mort-
gages and other private debts. “While men are madly
accumulating  enormous  debts,  their  legislators  are
making provisions for their nonpayment,” complained
a South Carolina merchant. To undercut the democratic
majorities in the state legislatures, creditors joined the
movement for a stronger central government.

Spurred  on  by  Shays’s  Rebellion,  nationalists  in
Congress secured a resolution calling for a convention
to revise the Articles of Confederation. Only an “effi-
cient  plan  from  the  Convention,”  a  fellow  nationalist
wrote to James Madison, “can prevent anarchy first &
civil convulsions afterwards.”

The Philadelphia Convention
In May 1787, fifty-five delegates arrived in Philadelphia.
They came from every state except Rhode Island, where
the  legislature  opposed  increasing  central  authority.
Most were strong nationalists; forty-two had served in
the Confederation Congress. They were also educated
and propertied: merchants, slaveholding planters, and
“monied  men.”  There  were  no  artisans,  backcountry
settlers, or tenants, and only a single yeoman farmer.

Some  influential  Patriots  missed  the  convention.
John  Adams  and  Thomas  Jefferson  were  serving  as
American  ministers  to  Britain  and  France,  respec-
tively. The Massachusetts General Court rejected Sam
Adams  as  a  delegate  because  he  opposed  a  stronger
national  government,  and  his  fellow  firebrand  from
Virginia, Patrick Henry, refused to attend because he
“smelt a rat.”

The  absence  of  experienced  leaders  and  contrary-
minded  delegates  allowed  capable  younger  national-
ists  to  set  the  agenda.  Declaring  that  the  convention
would  “decide  for  ever  the  fate  of  Republican
Government,”  James  Madison  insisted  on  increased
national  authority.  Alexander  Hamilton  of  New  York
likewise demanded a strong central government to pro-
tect the republic from “the imprudence of democracy.”

The Virginia and New Jersey Plans  The delegates
elected  George  Washington  as  their  presiding  officer
and  voted  to  meet  behind  closed  doors.  Then —
momentously — they decided not to revise the Articles
of Confederation but rather to consider the so-called
Virginia  Plan,  a  scheme  for  a  powerful  national  gov-
ernment  devised  by  James  Madison.  Just  thirty-six
years old, Madison was determined to fashion national
political  institutions  run  by  men  of  high  character.
A  graduate  of  Princeton,  he  had  read  classical  and

modern  political  theory  and  served  in  both  the
Confederation  Congress  and  the  Virginia  assembly.
Once  an  optimistic  Patriot,  Madison  had  grown  dis-
couraged  because  of  the  “narrow  ambition”  and  out-
look of state legislators.

Madison’s Virginia Plan differed from the Articles of
Confederation in three crucial respects. First, the plan
rejected state sovereignty in favor of the “supremacy of
national  authority,”  including  the  power  to  overturn
state laws. Second, it called for the national government
to be established by the people (not the states) and for
national laws to operate directly on citizens of the vari-
ous states. Third, the plan proposed a three-tier election
system  in  which  ordinary  voters  would  elect  only  the
lower house of the national legislature. This lower house
would  then  select  the  upper  house,  and  both  houses
would appoint the executive and judiciary.

From  a  political  perspective,  Madison’s  plan
had  two  fatal  flaws.  First,  most  state  politicians  and

James Madison, Statesman

Throughout his long public life, Madison kept the details of his
private life to himself. His biography, he believed, should be a
record of his public accomplishments, not his private affairs.
Future generations celebrated him not as a great man (like
Hamilton or Jefferson) or as a great president (like Washing-
ton), but as an original and incisive political thinker. The chief
architect of the U.S. Constitution and the Bill of Rights,
Madison was the preeminent republican political theorist
of his generation. Mead Art Museum, Amherst College, Amherst,
Massachusetts, Bequest of Herbert L. Pratt (Class of 1895) # 1945.82.

