206

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

citizens resolutely opposed allowing the national gov-
ernment to veto state laws. Second, the plan based rep-
resentation  in  the  lower  house  on  population;  this
provision,  a  Delaware  delegate  warned,  would  allow
the populous states to “crush the small ones whenever
they stand in the way of their ambitious or interested
views.”

So delegates from Delaware and other small states
rallied behind a  plan devised by William Paterson of
New Jersey. The New Jersey Plan gave the Confedera-
tion  the  power  to  raise  revenue,  control  commerce,
and  make  binding  requisitions  on  the  states.  But  it
preserved  the  states’  control  of  their  own  laws  and
guaranteed  their  equality:  as  in  the  Confederation
Congress, each state would have one vote in a unicam-
eral  legislature.  Delegates  from  the  more  populous
states  vigorously  opposed  this  provision.  After  a
month-long debate on the two plans, a bare majority of
the states agreed to use Madison’s Virginia Plan as the
basis of discussion.

This decision raised the odds that the convention
would  create  a  more  powerful  national  government.
Outraged  by  this  prospect,  two  New  York  delegates,
Robert  Yates  and  John  Lansing,  accused  their  col-
leagues  of  exceeding  their  mandate  to  revise  the
Articles and left the convention. The remaining dele-
gates met six days a week during the summer of 1787,
debating  both  high  principles  and  practical  details.
Experienced  politicians,  they  looked  for  a  plan  that
would be acceptable to most citizens and existing polit-
ical interests. Pierce Butler of South Carolina invoked
a  classical  Greek  precedent:  “We  must  follow  the
example of Solon, who gave the Athenians not the best
government  he  could  devise  but  the  best  they  would
receive.”

The Great Compromise  As the convention grappled
with the central problem of the representation of large
and small states, the Connecticut delegates suggested a
possible solution. They proposed that the national leg-
islature’s upper chamber (the Senate) have two mem-
bers from each state, while seats in the lower chamber
(the House of Representatives) be apportioned by pop-
ulation (determined every ten years by a national cen-
sus). After bitter debate, delegates from the populous
states reluctantly accepted this “Great Compromise.”

Other  state-related  issues  were  quickly  settled  by
restricting (or leaving ambiguous) the extent of cen-
tral  authority.  Some  delegates  opposed  a  national
system of courts, predicting that “the states will revolt
at  such  encroachments”  on  their  judicial  authority.

This  danger  led  the  convention  to  vest  the  judicial
power  “in  one  supreme  Court”  and  allow  the  new
national  legislature  to  decide  whether  to  establish
lower  courts  within  the  states.  The  convention  also
refused  to  set  a  property  requirement  for  voting  in
national elections. “Eight or nine states have extended
the right of suffrage beyond the freeholders,” George
Mason  of  Virginia  pointed  out.  “What  will  people
there say if they should be disfranchised?” Finally, the
convention specified that state legislatures would elect
members of the upper house, or Senate, and the states
would select the electors who would choose the presi-
dent. By allowing states to have important roles in the
new  constitutional  system,  the  delegates  hoped  that
their citizens would accept limits on state sovereignty.

Negotiations  over  Slavery  The  shadow  of  slav-
ery  hovered  over  many  debates,  and  Gouverneur
Morris  of  New  York  brought  it  into  view.  To  safe-
guard  property  rights,  Morris  wanted  life  terms  for
senators, a property qualification for voting in national
elections,  and  a  strong  president  with  veto  power.
Nonetheless,  he  rejected  the  legitimacy  of  two  tradi-
tional  types  of  property:  the  feudal  dues  claimed  by
aristocratic  landowners  and  the  ownership  of  slaves.
An  advocate  of  free  markets  and  personal  liberty,
Morris condemned slavery as “a nefarious institution.”
Many slave-owning delegates from the Chesapeake
region, including Madison and George Mason, recog-
nized  that  slavery  contradicted  republican  principles
and hoped for its eventual demise. They supported an
end  to  American  participation  in  the  Atlantic  slave
trade, a proposal the South Carolina and Georgia dele-
gates  angrily  rejected.  Unless  the  importation  of
African slaves continued, these rice planters and mer-
chants declared, their states “shall not be parties to the
Union.”  At  their  insistence,  the  convention  denied
Congress  the  power  to  regulate  immigration — and
so  the  slave  trade — until  1808  (American  Voices,
p. 208).

The  delegates  devised  other  slavery-related  com-
promises.  To  mollify  southern  planters,  they  wrote  a
“fugitive  clause”  that  allowed  masters  to  reclaim
enslaved  blacks  (or  white  indentured  servants)  who
fled to other states. But in acknowledgment of the anti-
slavery  sentiments  of  Morris  and  other  northerners,
the  delegates  excluded  the  words  slavery  and  slave
from  the  Constitution;  it  spoke  only  of  citizens  and
“all  other  Persons.”  Because  slaves  lacked  the  vote,
antislavery  delegates  wanted  their  census  numbers
in  Congress.
excluded  when  apportioning  seats

