CHAPTER 6

  Making War and Republican Governments, 1776–1789

207

Southerners — ironically,  given  that  they  considered
slaves property — demanded that slaves be counted in
the  census  the  same  as  full  citizens,  to  increase  the
South’s representation. Ultimately, the delegates agreed
that each slave would count as three-fifths of a free per-
son for purposes of representation and taxation, a com-
promise  that  helped  southern  planters  dominate  the
national government until 1860.

National Authority  Having addressed the concerns
of small states and slave states, the convention created
a  powerful  national  government.  The  Constitution
declared that congressional legislation was the “supreme”
law of the land. It gave the new government the power
to tax, raise an army and a navy, and regulate foreign
and  interstate  commerce,  with  the  authority  to  make
all  laws  “necessary  and  proper”  to  implement  those
and other provisions. To assist creditors and establish
the new government’s fiscal integrity, the Constitution
required  the  United  States  to  honor  the  existing
national  debt  and  prohibited  the  states  from  issuing
paper  money  or  enacting  “any  Law  impairing  the
Obligation of Contracts.”

The proposed constitution was not a “perfect pro-
duction,” Benjamin Franklin admitted, as he urged the
delegates  to  sign  it  in  September  1787.  But  the  great
statesman confessed his astonishment at finding “this
system  approaching  so  near  to  perfection.”  His  col-
leagues  apparently  agreed;  all  but  three  signed  the
document.

The People Debate Ratification
The procedure for ratifying the new constitution was
as  controversial  as  its  contents.  Knowing  that  Rhode
Island  (and  perhaps  other  states)  would  reject  it,  the
delegates did not submit the Constitution to the state
legislatures  for  their  unanimous  consent,  as  required
by  the  Articles  of  Confederation.  Instead,  they  arbi-
trarily — and  cleverly — declared  that  it  would  take
effect when ratified by conventions in nine of the thir-
teen states.

As  the  constitutional  debate  began  in  early  1788,
the  nationalists  seized  the  initiative  with  two  bold
moves.  First,  they  called  themselves  Federalists,  sug-
gesting that they supported a federal union — a loose,
decentralized  system — and  obscuring  their  commit-
ment  to  a  strong  national  government.  Second,  they
launched  a  coordinated  campaign  in  pamphlets  and
newspapers  to  explain  and  justify  the  Philadelphia
constitution.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did the Constitu-
tion, in its ﬁnal form,
differ from the plan that
James Madison originally
proposed?

The Antifederalists  The  opponents  of  the  Consti-
tution, called by default the Antifederalists, had diverse
backgrounds and motives. Some,
like  Governor  George  Clinton
of New York, feared that state gov-
ernments would lose power. Rural
democrats protested that the pro-
posed  document,  unlike  most
state constitutions, lacked a decla-
ration  of  individual  rights;  they
also  feared  that  the  central  gov-
ernment would be run by wealthy men. “Lawyers and
men of learning and monied men expect to be manag-
ers  of  this  Constitution,”  worried  a  Massachusetts
farmer.  “[T]hey  will  swallow  up  all  of  us  little
folks . . . just as the whale swallowed up Jonah.” Giving
political substance to these fears, Melancton Smith of
New York argued that the large electoral districts pre-
scribed by the Constitution would restrict office hold-
ing to wealthy men, whereas the smaller districts used
in  state  elections  usually  produced  legislatures  “com-
posed  principally  of  respectable  yeomanry.”  John
Quincy Adams agreed: if only “eight men” would repre-
sent Massachusetts, “they will infallibly be chosen from
the aristocratic part of the community.”

Smith  summed  up  the  views  of  Americans  who
held  traditional  republican  values.  To  keep  govern-
ment  “close  to  the  people,”  they  wanted  the  states  to
remain small sovereign republics tied together only for
trade  and  defense — not  the  “United  States”  but  the
“States United.” Citing the French political philosopher
Montesquieu,  Antifederalists  argued  that  republican
institutions  were  best  suited  to  small  polities.  “No
extensive empire can be governed on republican prin-
ciples,”  declared  James  Winthrop  of  Massachusetts.
Patrick Henry worried that the Constitution would re-
create  British  rule:  high  taxes,  an  oppressive  bureau-
cracy,  a  standing  army,  and  a  “great  and  mighty
President . . . supported  in  extravagant  munificence.”
As another Antifederalist put it, “I had rather be a free
citizen of the small republic of Massachusetts than an
oppressed subject of the great American empire.”

Federalists  Respond
In New York, where ratifica-
tion  was  hotly  contested,  James  Madison,  John  Jay,
and Alexander Hamilton defended the proposed con-
stitution in a series of eighty-five essays written in 1787
and  1788,  collectively  titled The  Federalist. This  work
influenced  political  leaders  throughout  the  country
and subsequently won acclaim as an important treatise
of  practical  republicanism.  Its  authors  denied  that  a

