A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

The First National

Debate over Slavery

In this part of the text, we trace the impact of republican ideology on American
politics and society. What happened when republicanism collided head-on with
the well-established practice of slavery? After the Revolution, the Massachusetts
courts abolished slavery, but in 1787, slavery was legal in the rest of the Union
and was the bedrock of social order and agricultural production in the southern
states. A look at the debates on the issue of the African slave trade at the Phila-
delphia convention and in a state ratifying convention shows that slavery was an
extremely divisive issue at the birth of the nation — a dark cloud threatening the
bright future of the young republic.

The Constitutional Convention

Slavery  was  not  a  major  topic  of  discussion  at  the
Philadelphia  convention,  but  it  surfaced  a  number  of
times,  notably  in  the  important  debate  over  representa-
tion (which produced the three-ﬁfths clause). A discussion
of the Atlantic slave trade began when Luther Martin, a
delegate  from  Maryland,  proposed  a  clause  allowing
Congress to impose a tax on or prohibit the importation of
slaves.

Mr. Martin proposed to vary article 7, sect. 4 so as
to allow a prohibition or tax on the importation of
slaves. . . . [He believed] it was inconsistent with the
principles of the Revolution, and dishonorable to the
American character, to have such a feature [promoting
the slave trade] in the Constitution.

Mr. [John] Rutledge [of South Carolina declared
that] religion and humanity had nothing to do with this
question. Interest alone is the governing principle with
nations. The true question at present is whether the
Southern states shall or shall not be parties to the
Union. . . .

Mr. [Oliver] Ellsworth [of Connecticut] was for leav-
ing the clause as it stands. Let every state import what it
pleases. The morality or wisdom of slavery are consider-
ations belonging to the states themselves. . . . The old
Confederation had not meddled with this point, and he
did not see any greater necessity for bringing it within
the policy of the new one.

Mr. [Charles C.] Pinckney [said] South Carolina can

never receive the plan [for a new constitution] if it pro-
hibits the slave trade. In every proposed extension of the
powers of Congress, that state has expressly and watch-
fully excepted that of meddling with the importation of
Negroes. . . .

Mr. [Roger] Sherman [of Connecticut] was for leav-

ing the clause as it stands. He disapproved of the slave
trade; yet, as the states were now possessed of the right

208

to import slaves, . . . and as it was expedient to have as
few objections as possible to the proposed scheme of
government, he thought it best to leave the matter as
we find it.

Col. [George] Mason [of Virginia stated that] this
infernal trade originated in the avarice of British mer-
chants. The British government constantly checked the
attempts of Virginia to put a stop to it. The present ques-
tion concerns not the importing states alone, but the
whole Union. . . . Maryland and Virginia, he said, had
already prohibited the importation of slaves expressly.
North Carolina had done the same in substance. All this
would be in vain if South Carolina and Georgia be at lib-
erty to import. The Western people are already calling
out for slaves for their new lands, and will fill that country
with slaves, if they can be got through South Carolina and
Georgia. Slavery discourages arts and manufactures. The
poor despise labor when performed by slaves. They pre-
vent the immigration of whites, who really enrich and
strengthen a country. . . .

Every master of slaves is born a petty tyrant. They
bring the judgment of Heaven on a country. As nations
cannot be rewarded or punished in the next world, they
must be in this. By an inevitable chain of causes and
effects, Providence punishes national sins by national
calamities. . . . He held it essential, in every point of
view, that the general government should have power
to prevent the increase of slavery.

Mr. Ellsworth, as he had never owned a slave, could
not judge of the effects of slavery on character. He said,
however, that if it was to be considered in a moral light,
we ought to go further, and free those already in the
country. . . . Let us not intermeddle. As population
increases, poor laborers will be so plenty as to render
slaves useless. Slavery, in time, will not be a speck in our
country. . . .

Gen. [Charles C.] Pinckney [argued that] South
Carolina and Georgia cannot do without slaves. As to

