210

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

centralized  government  would  lead  to  domestic  tyr-
anny.  Drawing  on  Montesquieu’s  theories  and  John
Adams’s  Thoughts  on  Government,  Madison,  Jay,  and
Hamilton pointed out that authority would be divided
among  the  president,  a  bicameral  legislature,  and  a
judiciary.  Each  branch  of  government  would  “check
and balance” the others and so preserve liberty.

In “Federalist No. 10,” Madison challenged the view
that republican governments only worked in small poli-
ties, arguing that a large state would better protect repub-
lican liberty. It was “sown in the nature of man,” Madison
wrote, for individuals to seek power and form factions.
Indeed,  “a  landed  interest,  a  manufacturing  interest,  a
mercantile interest, a moneyed interest, with many lesser
interests,  grow  up  of  necessity  in  civilized  nations.”  A
free  society  should  welcome  all  factions  but  keep  any
one  of  them  from  becoming  dominant — something
best achieved in a large republic. “Extend the sphere and
you  take  in  a  greater  variety  of  parties  and  interests,”
Madison concluded, inhibiting the formation of a major-
ity eager “to invade the rights of other citizens.”

The  Constitution  Ratified  The  delegates  debating
these  issues  in  the  state  ratification  conventions
included  untutored  farmers  and  middling  artisans  as
well  as  educated  gentlemen.  Generally,  backcountry
delegates were Antifederalists, while those from coastal
areas  were  Federalists.  In  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia
merchants  and  artisans  joined  commercial  farmers
to ratify the Constitution. Other early Federalist suc-
cesses  came  in  four  less  populous  states — Delaware,
New  Jersey,  Georgia,  and  Connecticut — where  dele-
gates hoped that a strong national government would
offset the power of large neighboring states (Map 6.7).
The  Constitution’s  first  real  test  came  in  January
1788 in Massachusetts, a hotbed of Antifederalist sen-
timent.  Influential  Patriots,  including  Samuel  Adams
and Governor John Hancock, opposed the new consti-
tution,  as  did  many  followers  of  Daniel  Shays.  But
Boston  artisans,  who  wanted  tariff  protection  from
British  imports,  supported  ratification.  To  win  over
other delegates, Federalist leaders assured the conven-
tion  that  they  would  recommend  a  national  bill  of

L. Superior

n
a
g
i
h
c
i
M
.
L

L.
Hur

o
n

L.Ontario

NEW YORK
July 26, 1788

L. Erie

PENNSYLVANIA
Dec. 12, 1787

Mississippi

R.

OhioR.

Kentucky
District

Tennessee
District

VIRGINIA
June 26, 1788

NORTH CAROLINA
Nov. 21, 1789

SOUTH
CAROLINA
May 23, 1788

GEORGIA
Jan. 2, 1788

MAINE
(part of MASS.)

NEW HAMPSHIRE
June 21, 1788

MASSACHUSETTS
Feb. 7, 1788

RHODE ISLAND
May 29, 1790

CONNECTICUT
Jan. 9, 1788

N

NEW JERSEY
Dec. 18, 1787

DELAWARE
Dec. 7, 1787

W

E

S

MARYLAND
Apr. 28, 1788

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

0

0

100

200 miles

100

200 kilometers

Votes at District Level
With date of ratification
by state convention

Delegates in support of ratification
Delegates opposed to ratification
Districts evenly divided
No returns

MAP 6.7
Ratifying the Constitution
of 1787

In 1907, geographer Owen
Libby mapped the votes
of members of the state
conventions that ratiﬁed
the Constitution. His map
showed that most dele-
gates from seaboard or
commercial farming
districts (which sent
many delegates to the
conventions) supported
the Constitution, while
those from sparsely
repre sented, subsistence-
oriented backcountry
areas opposed it. Sub-
sequent research has
conﬁrmed Libby’s
socioeconomic inter-
pretation of the voting
patterns in North and
South Carolina and in
Massachusetts. However,
other states’ delegates
were inﬂuenced by
different factors. For
example, in Georgia,
delegates from all
regions voted for
ratiﬁcation.

