CHAPTER 6

  CHAPTER REVIEW

211

rights. By a close vote of 187 to 168, the Federalists car-
ried the day.

Spring  brought  Federalist  victories  in  Maryland,
South  Carolina,  and  New  Hampshire,  reaching  the
nine-state  quota  required  for  ratification.  But  it  took
the  powerful  arguments  advanced  in  The  Federalist
and  more  promises  of  a  bill  of  rights  to  secure  the
Constitution’s  adoption  in  the  essential  states  of
Virginia and New York. The votes were again close: 89
to 79 in Virginia and 30 to 27 in New York.

Testifying to their respect for popular sovereignty
and majority rule, most Americans accepted the ver-
dict of the ratifying conventions. “A decided majority”
of  the  New  Hampshire  assembly  had  opposed  the
“new system,” reported Joshua Atherton, but now they
said, “It  is adopted, let us try it.” In Virginia, Patrick
Henry vowed to “submit as a quiet citizen” and fight
for amendments “in a constitutional way.”

Unlike  in  France,  where  the  Revolution  of  1789
divided the society into irreconcilable factions for gen-
erations,  the  American  Constitutional  Revolution  of
1787  created  a  national  republic  that  enjoyed  broad
popular  support.  Federalists  celebrated  their  triumph
by organizing great processions in the seaport cities. By
marching in an orderly fashion — in conscious contrast
to the riotous Revolutionary mobs — Federalist-minded
citizens  affirmed  their  allegiance  to  a  self-governing
but elite-ruled republican nation.

SUMMARY
In  this  chapter,  we  examined  the  unfolding  of  two
related  sets  of  events.  The  first  was  the  war  between
Britain  and  its  rebellious  colonies  that  began  in  1776
and  ended  in  1783.  The  two  great  battles  of  Saratoga
(1777) and Yorktown (1781) determined the outcome
of that conflict. Surprisingly, given the military might of
the British Empire, both were American victories. These
triumphs testify to the determination of George Wash-
ington, the resilience of the Continental army, and sup-
port for the Patriot cause from hundreds of local militias
and tens of thousands of taxpaying citizens.

This popular support reflected the Patriots’ second
success:  building  effective  institutions  of  republican
government.  These  elected  institutions  of  local  and
state  governance  evolved  out  of  colonial-era  town
meetings  and  representative  assemblies.  They  were
defined in the state constitutions written between 1776
and  1781,  and  their  principles  informed  the  first
national  constitution,  the  Articles  of  Confederation.
Despite the challenges posed by conflicts over suffrage,
women’s rights, and fiscal policy, these self-governing
political institutions carried the new republic success-
fully through the war-torn era and laid the foundation
for the Constitution of 1787, the national charter that
endures today.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

KEY TERMS

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

Battle of Long Island (1776)

(p. 184)

Battle of Saratoga (1777) (p. 187)
Valley Forge (p. 189)
Philipsburg Proclamation (p. 190)
Battle of Yorktown (1781) (p. 195)
currency tax (p. 196)
Treaty of Paris of 1783 (p. 196)
Pennsylvania constitution of

1776 (p. 198)

mixed government (p. 198)
Articles of Confederation (p. 200)
Northwest Ordinance of 1787

(p. 201)

Shays’s Rebellion (p. 204)
Virginia Plan (p. 205)
New Jersey Plan (p. 206)
Federalists (p. 207)
Antifederalists (p. 207)
Federalist No. 10 (p. 210)

KEY PEOPLE

General George Washington

(p. 184)

General William Howe (p. 184)
General Horatio Gates (p. 187)
Robert Morris (p. 188)
Baron von Steuben (p. 189)
Judith Sargent Murray (p. 199)
James Madison (p. 205)

