212

PART 3

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  What were the principal reasons that Great Britain,
despite its enormous military advantages, lost the
War for Independence?

2.  The  war  had  wrenching  effects  on  the  American
economy. What economic problems became espe-
cially  acute  during  wartime?  How  did  the  states
and  the  Second  Continental  Congress  attempt  to
address them?

3.  Federalists and Antifederalists both claimed to rep-
resent the true spirit of the American Revolution.
Which of these competing visions of national iden-
tity do you think was right? Why?

4.  THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING  Consider the
events listed under “Work, Exchange, and Technol-
ogy” and “Politics and Power” for the period 1776–
1787  on  the  thematic  timeline  on  page  149.  How
did  war  debt  and  inflation influence  the  develop-
ment of political institutions during these years?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS TIME AND PLACE

In Chapter 5, we
saw  the  way  that  protests  against  imperial  policy
grew until colonists chose to declare their indepen-
dence rather than submit to Parliament’s authority.
By 1787, the problems created by the Revolutionary
War forced leaders of the newly independent states
to  consider  plans  for  their  own  powerful  central
government.  What  problems  led  nationalists  to
believe  such  a  step  was  necessary?  How  did
Antifederalists  draw  on  Revolutionary  ideas  to
make  their  case  against  the  Constitution?  What
claims did nationalists make in response to dampen
Antifederalist fears?

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  Look again at Map 6.5 on
page 202 showing western land claims in the 1780s.
If  these  claims  had  not  been  ceded  to  the
Continental  Congress,  what  would  have  been  the
likely result? Why was it so important to the sur-
vival  of  the  Confederation  that  individual  states
give up their claims to these western lands?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Colin G. Calloway, The American Revolution in Indian
Country (1995). Tracks the experiences of numerous
Native American communities in the Revolution.

Saul Cornell, The Other Founders (1999). Explores the
ideas and legacy of the Antifederalists.

John C. Dann, ed., The Revolution Remembered
(1980). Contains vivid eyewitness accounts of the
Revolution.

Pauline Maier, Ratification (2010). A compelling
narrative of the debate over the Constitution.

Michael McDonnell, The Politics of War (2007). A
penetrating account of Virginia’s mobilization for war.

Leonard Richards, Shays’s Rebellion (2003). A persua-
sive interpretation of the rebellion’s participants and
motives.

