Hammering Out a
Federal Republic
1787–1820

Like  an  earthquake,  the  American

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
What  was  required  to  make  the
United States a strong, viable, inde-
pendent  republic  in  its  early  years,
and how did debates over the Con-
stitution  shape  relations  between
the  national  government  and  the
states?

Revolution  shook
the  European
monarchical  order,  and  its  after-
shocks reverberated for decades. By “cre-
ating a new republic based on the rights of
the individual, the North Americans intro-
duced  a  new  force  into  the  world,”  the
eminent  German  historian  Leopold  von
Ranke warned the king of Bavaria in 1854,
a force that might cost the monarch his throne. Before 1776, “a king who ruled by the
grace  of  God  had  been  the  center  around  which  everything  turned.  Now  the  idea
emerged that power should come from below [from the people].”

Other  republican-inspired  upheavals — England’s  Puritan  Revolution  of  the  1640s
and the French Revolution of 1789 — ended in political chaos and military rule. Similar
fates befell many Latin American republics that won independence from Spain in the
early nineteenth century. But the American states escaped both anarchy and dictator-
ship. Having been raised in a Radical Whig political culture that viewed standing armies
and powerful generals as instruments of tyranny, General George Washington left pub-
lic life in 1783 to manage his plantation, astonishing European observers but bolstering
the authority of elected Patriot leaders. “’Tis a Conduct so novel,” American painter
John Trumbull reported from London, that it is “inconceivable to People [here].”

The great task of fashioning representative republican governments absorbed the
energy and intellect of an entire generation and was rife with conﬂict. Seeking to per-
petuate  the  elite-led  polity  of  the  colonial  era,  Federalists  celebrated  “natural  aristo-
crats”  such  as  Washington  and  condemned  the  radical  republicanism  of  the  French
Revolution. In response, Jefferson and his Republican followers claimed the Fourth of
July  as  their  holiday  and  “we  the  people”  as  their  political  language.  “There  was  a
grand democrat procession in Town on the 4th of July,” came a report from Baltimore:
“All the farmers, tanners, black-smiths, shoemakers, etc. were there . . . and afterwards
they went to a grand feast.”

Many  people  of  high  status  worried  that  the  new  state  governments  were  too
attentive to the demands of such ordinary workers and their families. When considering
a  bill,  Connecticut  conservative  Ezra  Stiles  grumbled,  every  elected  ofﬁcial  “instantly
thinks how it will affect his constituents” rather than how it would enhance the general
welfare.  What  Stiles  criticized  as  irresponsible,  however,  most  Americans  welcomed.
The concerns of ordinary citizens were now paramount, and traditional elites trembled.

7

C H A P T E R

THE POLITICAL CRISIS
OF THE 1790S

The Federalists Implement the

Constitution

Hamilton’s Financial Program

Jefferson’s Agrarian Vision

The French Revolution Divides

Americans

The Rise of Political Parties

A REPUBLICAN EMPIRE
IS BORN

Sham Treaties and Indian Lands

Migration and the Changing

Farm Economy

The Jefferson Presidency

Jefferson and the West

THE WAR OF 1812 AND
THE TRANSFORMATION
OF POLITICS

Conflict in the Atlantic and

the West

The War of 1812

The Federalist Legacy

214

