216

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

The Political Crisis
of the 1790s
The  final  decade  of  the  eighteenth  century  brought
fresh challenges for American politics. The Federalists
split  into  two  factions  over  financial  policy  and  the
French  Revolution,  and  their  leaders,  Alexander
Hamilton  and  Thomas  Jefferson,  offered  contrasting
visions of the future. Would the United States remain
an  agricultural  nation  governed  by  local  officials,  as
Jefferson  hoped?  Or  would  Hamilton’s  vision  of  a
strong national government and an economy based on
manufacturing become reality?

The Federalists Implement
the Constitution
The Constitution expanded the dimensions of political
life  by  allowing  voters  to  choose  national  leaders  as
well  as  local  and  state  officials.  The  Federalists  swept
the  election  of  1788,  winning  forty-four  seats  in  the
House  of  Representatives;  only  eight  Antifederalists
won  election.  As  expected,  members  of  the  electoral
college  chose  George  Washington  as  president.  John
Adams  received  the  second-highest  number  of  elec-
toral votes and became vice president.

Devising the New Government  Once the military
savior  of  his  country,  Washington  now  became  its
political  father.  At  age  fifty-seven,  the  first  president
possessed  great  personal  dignity  and  a  cautious  per-
sonality.  To  maintain  continuity,  he  adopted  many
of  the  administrative  practices  of  the  Confederation
and asked Congress to reestablish the existing execu-
tive  departments:  Foreign  Affairs  (State),  Finance
(Treasury), and War. To head the Department of State,
Washington chose Thomas Jefferson, a fellow Virginian
and an experienced diplomat. For secretary of the trea-
sury, he turned to Alexander Hamilton, a lawyer and
his  former  military  aide.  The  president  designated
Jefferson, Hamilton, and Secretary of War Henry Knox
as his cabinet, or advisory body.

The  Constitution  mandated  a  supreme  court,  but
the Philadelphia convention gave Congress the task of
creating a national court system. The Federalists wanted
strong  national  institutions,  and  the  Judiciary  Act  of
1789 reflected their vision. The act established a federal
district  court  in  each  state  and  three  circuit  courts  to
hear appeals from the districts, with the Supreme Court
having the final say. The Judiciary Act also specified that

cases arising in state  courts that involved federal laws
could be appealed to the Supreme Court. This provision
ensured that federal judges would have the final say on
the meaning of the Constitution.

The Bill of Rights  The Federalists kept their prom-
ise to add a declaration of rights to the Constitution.
James  Madison,  now  a  member  of  the  House  of
Representatives,  submitted  nineteen  amendments  to
the First Congress; by 1791, ten had been approved by
Congress and ratified by the states. These ten amend-
ments,  known  as  the  Bill  of  Rights,  safeguard  funda-
mental  personal  rights,  including  freedom  of  speech
and  religion,  and  mandate  legal  procedures,  such  as
trial  by  jury.  By  protecting  individual  citizens,  the
amendments eased Antifederalists’ fears of an oppres-
sive national government and secured the legitimacy of
the Constitution. They also addressed the issue of fed-
eralism:  the  proper  balance  between  the  authority  of
the national and state governments. But that question
was  constantly  contested  until  the  Civil  War  and
remains important today.

Hamilton’s Financial Program
George  Washington’s  most  important  decision  was
choosing Alexander Hamilton as secretary of the trea-
sury. An ambitious self-made man of great intelligence,
Hamilton married into the Schuyler family, influential
Hudson River Valley landowners, and was a prominent
lawyer in New York City. At the Philadelphia conven-
tion, he condemned the “democratic spirit” and called
for an authoritarian government and a president with
near-monarchical powers.

As treasury secretary, Hamilton devised bold poli-
cies to enhance national authority and to assist finan-
ciers  and  merchants.  He  outlined  his  plans  in  three
pathbreaking  reports  to  Congress:  on  public  credit
(Jan uary 1790), on a national bank (December 1790),
and on manufactures (December 1791). These reports
outlined  a  coherent  program  of  national  mercantil-
ism — government-assisted economic development.

Public Credit: Redemption and Assumption  The
financial and social implications of Hamilton’s “Report
on  the  Public  Credit”  made  it  instantly  controversial.
Hamilton asked Congress to redeem at face value the
$55 million in Confederation securities held by foreign
and domestic investors (Figure 7.1). His reasons were
simple: As an underdeveloped nation, the United States
needed  good  credit  to  secure  loans  from  Dutch  and

