CHAPTER 7

  Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820

217

Hamilton’s system of public credit
(millions of dollars)
Debts Assets

$75.6 million in bonds sold mostly to the wealthy,

creating a permanent national debt

Total
debt

$42.4

+

$21.5

+

$11.7

National war debt (redemption
of Confederation securities)

War debts
assumed
from states

Owed to
foreigners

Excise and
other revenue

$1.2

+

$4.4

= $5.6 million gross revenue

Customs
revenue

Annual interest owed to bondholders on debt

$4.6

$1.0

Net revenue for gov’t spending

FIGURE 7.1
Hamilton’s Fiscal Structure, 1792

As treasury secretary, Alexander Hamilton established a national debt by issuing government bonds
and using the proceeds to redeem Confederation securities and assume the war debts of the states.
To pay the annual interest due on the bonds, he used the revenue from excise taxes and customs
duties. Hamilton deliberately did not attempt to redeem the bonds because he wanted to tie the
interests of the wealthy Americans who owned them to the new national government.

British  financiers.  However,  Hamilton’s  redemption
plan would give enormous profits to speculators, who
had  bought  up  depreciated  securities.  For  example,
the Massachusetts firm of Burrell &  Burrell had paid
$600  for  Confederation  notes  with  a  face  value  of
$2,500; it stood to reap a profit of $1,900. Such windfall
gains  offended  a  majority  of  Americans,  who  con-
demned  the  speculative  practices  of  capitalist  finan-
ciers.  Equally  controversial  was  Hamilton’s  proposal
to  pay  the  Burrells  and  other  note  holders  with  new
interest-bearing  securities,  thereby  creating  a  perma-
nent national debt.

Patrick Henry condemned this plan “to erect, and
concentrate,  and  perpetuate  a  large  monied  interest”
and warned that it would prove “fatal to the existence
of  American  liberty.”  James  Madison  demanded  that
Congress  recompense  those  who  originally  owned
Confederation securities: the thousands of shopkeep-
ers, farmers, and soldiers who had bought or accepted
them  during  the  dark  days  of  the  war.  However,  it
would have been difficult to trace the original owners;
moreover,  nearly  half  the  members  of  the  House  of
Representatives  owned  Confederation  securities  and
would profit personally from Hamilton’s plan. Melding
practicality  with  self-interest,  the  House  rejected
Madison’s suggestion.

UNDERSTAND POINTS
OF VIEW
Why did Hamilton believe
a national debt would
strengthen the United
States and help to ensure
its survival?

Hamilton then proposed that the national govern-
ment  further  enhance  public  credit  by  assuming  the
war  debts  of  the  states.  This
assumption plan, costing $22 mil-
lion, also favored well-to-do cred-
itors such as Abigail Adams, who
had  bought  depreciated  Massa-
chusetts  government  bonds  with
a  face  value  of  $2,400  for  only  a
few  hundred  dollars  and  would
reap a windfall profit. Still, Adams
was a long-term investor, not a speculator like Assistant
Secretary  of  the  Treasury  William  Duer.  Knowing
Hamilton’s  intentions in advance, Duer and his associ-
ates secretly bought up $4.6 million of the war bonds of
southern states at  bargain rates. Congressional critics
condemned Duer’s speculation. They also pointed out
that some states had already paid off their war debts; in
response,  Hamilton  promised  to  reimburse  those
states. To win the votes of congressmen from Virginia
and  Maryland,  the  treasury  chief  arranged  another
deal:  he  agreed  that  the  permanent  national  capital
would be built along the Potomac River, where suspi-
cious  southerners  could  easily  watch  its  operations.
Such  astute  bargaining  gave  Hamilton  the  votes  he
needed to enact his redemption and assumption plans.

