218

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

Creating  a  National  Bank
In  December  1790,
Hamilton  asked  Congress  to  charter  the  Bank  of  the
United States, which would be jointly owned by private
stockholders and the national government. Hamilton
argued  that  the  bank  would  provide  stability  to  the
specie-starved American economy by making loans to
merchants,  handling  government  funds,  and  issuing
bills of credit — much as the Bank of England had done
in  Great  Britain.  These  potential  benefits  persuaded
Congress to grant Hamilton’s bank a twenty-year char-
ter and to send the legislation to the president for his
approval.

At this critical juncture, Secretary of State Thomas
Jefferson  joined  with  James  Madison  to  oppose
Hamilton’s financial initiatives. Jefferson charged that
Hamilton’s  national  bank  was  unconstitutional.  “The
incorporation  of  a  Bank,”  Jefferson  told  President
Washington,  was  not  a  power  expressly  “delegated  to
the United States by the Constitution.” Jefferson’s argu-
ment rested on a strict interpretation of the Constitu-
tion.  Hamilton  preferred  a  loose  interpretation;  he
told Washington that Article 1, Section 8, empowered
Congress to make “all Laws which shall be necessary
and  proper”  to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  the
Constitution.  Agreeing  with  Hamilton,  the  president
signed the legislation.

Raising  Revenue  Through  Tariffs  Hamilton  now
sought revenue to pay the annual interest on the national
debt. At his insistence, Congress imposed excise taxes,
including  a  duty  on  whiskey  distilled  in  the  United
States.  These  taxes  would  yield  $1  million  a  year.  To
raise another $4 million to $5 million, the treasury sec-
retary  proposed  higher  tariffs  on  foreign  imports.
Although Hamilton’s “Report on Manu fac tures” (1791)

urged  the  expansion  of  American  manufacturing,  he
did  not  support  high  protective  tariffs  that  would
exclude foreign products. Rather, he advocated moder-
ate  revenue  tariffs  that  would  pay  the  interest  on  the
debt and other government expenses.

Hamilton’s scheme worked brilliantly. As American
trade  increased,  customs  revenue  rose  steadily  and
paid  down  the  national  debt.  Controversies  notwith-
standing, the treasury secretary had devised a strikingly
modern and successful fiscal system; as entrepreneur
Samuel Blodget Jr. declared in 1801, “the country pros-
pered beyond all former example.”

Jefferson’s Agrarian Vision
Hamilton paid a high political price for his success. As
Washington began his second four-year term in 1793,
Hamilton’s financial measures had split the Federalists
into bitterly opposed factions. Most northern Federal-
ists supported the treasury secretary, while most south-
ern  Federalists  joined  a  group  headed  by  Madison
and Jefferson. By 1794, the two factions had acquired
names.  Hamiltonians  remained  Federalists;  the  allies
of Madison and Jefferson called themselves Democratic
Republicans or simply Republicans.

Thomas Jefferson spoke for southern planters and
western farmers. Well-read in architecture, natural his-
tory, agricultural science, and political theory, Jefferson
embraced  the  optimism  of  the  Enlightenment.  He
believed in the “improvability of the human race” and
deplored  the  corruption  and  social  divisions  that
threatened  its  progress.  Having  seen  the  poverty  of
laborers  in  British  factories,  Jefferson  doubted  that
wageworkers had the economic and political indepen-
dence needed to sustain a republican polity.

Two Visions of America

Thomas Jefferson (left) and Alexander Hamilton confront
each other in these portraits, as they did in the political battles
of the 1790s. Jefferson was pro-French, Hamilton pro-British.
Jefferson favored farmers and artisans; Hamilton supported
merchants and ﬁnanciers. Jefferson believed in democracy
and rule by legislative majorities; Hamilton argued for strong
executives and judges. Still, in the contested presidential elec tion
of 1800, Hamilton (who detested candidate Aaron Burr) threw
his support to Jefferson and secured the presidency for his
longtime political foe. The White House Historical Association (White
House Collection). / Yale University Art Gallery/Art Resource, NY.

