CHAPTER 7

  Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820

219

Jefferson  therefore  set  his  democratic  vision  of
America  in  a  society  of  independent  yeomen  farm
families. “Those who labor in the earth are the chosen
people  of  God,”  he  wrote.  The  grain  and  meat  from
their homesteads would feed European nations, which
“would  manufacture  and  send  us  in  exchange  our
clothes  and  other  comforts.”  Jefferson’s  notion  of  an
international  division  of  labor  resembled  that  pro-
posed  by  Scottish  economist  Adam  Smith  in  The
Wealth of Nations (1776).

To see a longer excerpt of Jefferson’s Notes on the
State of Virginia, along with other primary sources
from this period, see Sources for America’s History.

Turmoil in Europe brought Jefferson’s vision closer
to reality. The French Revolution began in 1789; four
years  later,  the  First  French  Republic  (1792–1804)
went  to  war  against  a British-led  coalition of  monar-
chies. As fighting disrupted European farming, wheat
prices  leaped  from  5  to  8  shillings  a  bushel  and
remained  high  for  twenty  years,  bringing  substantial
profits  to  Chesapeake  and  Middle  Atlantic  farmers.
“Our  farmers  have  never  experienced  such  prosper-
ity,”  remarked  one  observer.  Simultaneously,  a  boom
in  the  export  of  raw  cotton,  fueled  by  the  invention
of  the  cotton  gin  and  the  mechanization  of  cloth
 production  in  Britain,  boosted  the  economies  of
Georgia and South Carolina. As Jefferson had hoped,
European  markets  brought  prosperity  to  American
agriculture.

The French Revolution
Divides Americans
American merchants profited even more handsomely
from the European war. In 1793, President Washington
issued a Proclamation of Neutrality, allowing U.S. citi-
zens to trade with all belligerents. As neutral carriers,
American  merchant  ships  claimed  a  right  to  pass
through Britain’s naval blockade of French ports, and
American firms quickly took over the lucrative sugar
trade  between  France  and  its  West  Indian  islands.
Commercial  earnings  rose  spectacularly,  averaging
$20 million annually in the 1790s — twice the value of
cotton  and  tobacco  exports.  As  the  American  mer-
chant  fleet  increased  from  355,000  tons  in  1790  to
1.1 million tons in 1808, northern shipbuilders and mer-
chants  provided  work  for  thousands  of  shipwrights,
sailmakers,  dockhands,  and  seamen.  Carpenters,
masons, and cabinetmakers in Boston, New York, and
Philadelphia  easily  found  work  building  warehouses

and fashionable “Federal-style” town houses for newly
affluent merchants.

Ideological  Politics  As  Americans  profited  from
Europe’s  struggles,  they  argued  passionately  over  its
ideologies. Most Americans had welcomed the French
Revolution  (1789–1799)  because  it  abolished  feudal-
ism  and  established  a  constitutional  monarchy.  The
creation of the First French Republic was more contro-
versial.  Many  applauded  the  end  of  the  monarchy
and embraced the democratic ideology of the radical
Jacobins. Like the Jacobins, they formed political clubs
and began to address one another as “citizen.” However,
Americans  with  strong  religious  beliefs  condemned
the  new  French  government  for  closing  Christian
churches  and  promoting  a  rational  religion based  on
“natural morality.” Fearing social revolution at  home,
wealthy  Americans  condemned  revolutionary  leader
Robespierre  and  his  followers  for  executing  King
Louis XVI and three thousand aristocrats.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did Jefferson’s idea of
an agrarian republic differ
from the economic vision
put forward by Alexander
Hamilton?

Their fears were well founded,
because  Hamilton’s  economic
policies quickly sparked a domes-
tic  insurgency.  In  1794,  western
Pennsylvania  farmers  mounted
the  so-called  Whiskey  Rebellion
to protest Hamilton’s excise tax on
spirits (Thinking Like a Historian,
p. 220). This tax had cut demand
for the corn whiskey the farmers distilled and bartered
for eastern manufactures. Like the Sons of Liberty in
1765  and  the  Shaysites  in  1786,  the  Whiskey  Rebels
assailed the tax collectors who sent the farmers’ hard-
earned  money  to  a  distant  government.  Protesters
waved banners proclaiming the French revolutionary
slogan “Liberty, Equality, Fraternity!” To deter popular
rebellion  and  uphold  national  authority,  President
Washington raised a militia force of 12,000 troops and
dispersed the Whiskey Rebels.

Jay’s  Treaty  Britain’s  maritime  strategy  intensified
political divisions in America. Beginning in late 1793,
the  British  navy  seized  250  American  ships  carrying
French sugar and other goods. Hoping to protect mer-
chant  property  through  diplomacy,  Washington  dis-
patched  John  Jay  to  Britain.  But  Jay  returned  with  a
controversial  treaty  that  ignored  the  American  claim
that “free ships make free goods” and accepted Britain’s
right to stop neutral ships. The treaty also required the
U.S. government to make “full and complete compen-
sation”  to  British  merchants  for  pre–Revolutionary
War  debts  owed  by  American  citizens.  In  return,  the

