T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

The Social Life

of Alcohol

Alcohol  was  ubiquitous  in  post-Revolutionary  America.  Expensive  wines  and
distilled  spirits  traveled  through  the  channels  of  Atlantic  trade;  molasses  was
imported from the West Indies and distilled into rum in American port towns;
and cider, beer, and whiskey were produced on a small scale everywhere in the
countryside. Taverns were centers of social and political activity. Alcohol both mir-
rored and reinforced the economic and geographical divisions in American life.

1.  James Newport’s ad in the Pennsylvania Gazette,

1790.

JAMES NEWPORT, At his Wine, Spirit and Cordial
Stores, in Second street, at the upper corner of Carter’s
alley, has, by Wholesale and Retail,

MADEIRA, Sherry, Lisbon, Teneriffe, Malaga, Fayal,
and Port Wines, Jamaica spirits, Antigua rum, Philadel-
phia ditto, Holland gin, Philadelphia ditto, very excellent,
in cases, Coniac [sic] brandy, American ditto, good flavor,
choice shrub. CORDIALS, &c. Anniseed water, clove
water, all-fours, Cinnamon water, prime wine and rum
colouring, wine bitters. Spirits of wine. Retail Stores and
Tavern-keepers will in particular, find their interest in
buying here, the articles being all the best in their kind,
and selling at the most reduced prices. Philadelphia,
April 30, 1790.

2.  Benjamin Chew on providing alcohol to his slaves,
1794. The instructions of a prominent Philadelphia
lawyer and landowner to his overseer about giving
rum to his slaves during the harvest.

I have written . . . to let you have [illegible] Rum & other
necessaries for the Harvest. But as these articles are so
[illegible] dear I must recommend it to you to be as spar-
ing of them as possible. . . . I must rely on you good man
[to conduct] the Business. . . . I would have you let the
People have a little Rum — let them be cautious in using
too much Spirits during Harvest — it will be well to mix
some molasses with water to drink — it is very wholesome
& much recommended. . . . I need not caution you that a
great deal depends upon your own proper attention to
yourself and that you are careful of good Conduct dur-
ing Harvest.

3.  Anonymous, The Toast, c. 1810–1815.

Source: John Nugent Collection, Newburgh, Indiana.

220

