4.  John Lewis Krimmel, Village Tavern, 1814. This

painting of a postman arriving at a Pennsylvania
tavern with letters and newspapers reminds us
that taverns were not merely places to drink.

execution and obtaining a repeal of the excise law, he or
they will be deemed as enemies and stand opposed to vir-
tuous principles of republican liberty, and shall receive
punishment according to the nature of the offense.

And whereas, a certain John Reed, now resident in
Washington, and being at his place near Pittsburgh, called
Reedsburgh, and having a set of stills employed at said
Reedsburgh, entered on the excise docket, contrary to the
will and good pleasure of his fellow citizens, and came not
forth to assist in the suppression of the execution of said
law, by aiding and assisting in the late expedition, have, by
delinquency, manifested his approbation to the execution
of the aforesaid law, is hereby charged forthwith to cause
the contents of this paper, without adding or diminishing,
to be published in the Pittsburgh Gazette, the ensuing
week, under the no less penalty than the consumption
of his distillery.

Given under my hand, this 19th day of July, one thou-

sand seven hundred and ninety-four.

Source: John Lewis Krimmel (American, 1786–1821) Village Tavern, 1813–1814,
oil on canvas, 167∕8 x 22½ inches, Toledo Museum of Art (Toledo, Ohio) Purchased
with funds from the Florence Scott Libbey Bequest in Memory of her Father,
Maurice A. Scott. 1954.13. Photo Credit: Photography Incorporated, Toledo.

Sources: (1) James Newport, Pennsylvania Gazette, May 5, 1790; (2) Chew Family
Papers, Box 773, ff. 25, 10, Historical Society of Pennsylvania; (5) Pennsylvania Gazette,
October 1, 1794; (6) Pennsylvania Archives, 2nd ser., 4:61–62 (Harrisburg: E. K.
Meyers, State Printer, 1890).

5.  Public notice from the Pennsylvania Gazette,
1794. Here, a tavern serves as the gathering
place for citizens interested in nominating
candidates for election to ofﬁce.

THE INHABITANTS of the County of Chester, are
hereby requested to meet at the Centre house, kept by
Abraham Marshall, in West Bradford, on FRIDAY the
10th Day of October next, at 10 o’clock, A. M. in order to
form a TICKET for the ensuing Election.

6.  Tom the Tinker demands compliance, July 23, 1794.
During the Whiskey Rebellion, “Tom the Tinker”
pinned this notice to a tree near John Reed’s
distillery. Reed had it published in a Pittsburgh
newspaper.

In taking a survey of the troops under my direction in
the late expedition against that insolent exciseman, John
Neville, I find there were a great number of delinquents,
even among those who carry on distilling. It will, there-
fore, be observed that I, Tom the Tinker, will not suffer
any certain class or set of men to be excluded [from] the
service of this my district, when notified to attend on any
expedition carried on in order to obstruct the execution
of the excise law, and obtain a repeal thereof.

And I do declare on my solemn word, that if such
delinquents do not come forth on the next alarm, with
equipments, and give their assistance in opposing the

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Who is the intended audience for an advertisement like
James Newport’s (source 1)? How many Atlantic ports of
call are represented in the products he advertises?
2.  The two paintings (sources 3 and 4), set in the interiors

of a private home and a tavern, depict mostly men. What
have they gathered for in each case? Village Tavern is set
during the War of 1812. How does that fact inﬂuence
your interpretation of the scene? What do you think
the woman and child are doing in the tavern?

3.  Village Tavern (source 4) and the ad calling for a political
gathering (source 5) both suggest the way that politics
and drinking often mixed. How might the fact that
taverns were gathering places for political discussion
and decision making have inﬂuenced outcomes?

4.  What concerns does Benjamin Chew express in his cor-
respondence with his overseer (source 2)? Given those
worries, why do you think he provides rum to his slaves
at all?

5.  Tom the Tinker expressed the collective will of whiskey
distillers in western Pennsylvania during the Whiskey
Rebellion (source 6). Why would it have been important
to enforce unanimous action during the uprising?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Considering everything you know about the trade and
consumption of alcohol, social stratiﬁcation in the early
republic, and differences between urban and rural commu-
nities, write a short essay that considers the ways in which
taverns and alcohol helped unite people in some ways while
differentiating or dividing them in others.

221

