222

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

The Whiskey Rebellion, 1794

This painting of Washington reviewing the militia forces that would march against the Whiskey Rebels in
western Pennsylvania expresses a Federalist vision of hierarchy (in the form of ofﬁcers on horseback) and
order (represented by the ranks of troops). The reality was messier: militia was called up from four states,
but when volunteers were too few the states resorted to a draft, which prompted protests and riots. In the
end, the militia force of more than 12,000 men was larger than the Continental army itself through much
of the Revolution. Upon its approach, the rebellion evaporated. Twenty-four men were indicted for treason;
two were sentenced to hang, but Washington pardoned them to encourage peaceful reconciliation. The
Granger Collection, New York.

agreement  allowed  Americans  to  submit  claims  for
illegal seizures and required the British to remove their
troops and Indian agents from the Northwest Territory.
Despite  Republican  charges  that  Jay’s  Treaty  was  too
conciliatory, the Senate ratified it in 1795, but only by
the two-thirds majority required by the Constitution.
As  long  as  the  Federalists  were  in  power,  the  United
States would have a pro-British foreign policy.

The  Haitian  Revolution  The  French  Revolution
inspired  a  revolution closer  to  home  that  would  also
impact the United States. The wealthy French planta-
tion  colony  of  Saint-Domingue
in  the  West  Indies  was  deeply
divided: a small class of elite plant-
ers  stood  atop  the  population  of
40,000 free whites and dominated
the island’s half million slaves. In

IDENTIFY CAUSES
How did events abroad
during the 1790s sharpen
political divisions in the
United States?

between,  some  28,000  gens  de  couleur — free  men  of
color — were excluded from most professions, forbid-
den from taking the names of their white relatives, and
prevented from dressing and carrying themselves like
whites.  The  French  Revolution  intensified  conflict
between planters and free blacks, giving way to a mas-
sive slave uprising in 1791 that aimed to abolish slav-
ery. The uprising touched off years of civil war, along
with  Spanish  and  British  invasions.  In  1798,  black
Haitians  led  by  Toussaint  L’Ouverture — himself  a
former  slave-owning  planter — seized  control  of  the
country. After five more years of fighting, in 1803 Saint-
Domingue  became  the  independent  nation  of  Haiti:
the first black republic in the Atlantic World.

The  Haitian  Revolution  profoundly  impacted  the
United  States.  In  1793,  thousands  of  refugees —
planters, slaves, and free blacks alike — fled the island
and  traveled  to  Charleston,  Norfolk,  Baltimore,

