CHAPTER 7

  Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820

223

horrifying  paradox,  a  perversion  of  the  republican
ideal (America Compared, p. 224).

The Rise of Political Parties
The appearance of Federalists and Republicans marked
a new stage in American politics — what historians call
the  First  Party  System.  Colonial  legislatures  had  fac-
tions based on family, ethnicity, or region, but they did
not have organized political parties. Nor did the new
state and national constitutions make any provision for
political  societies.  Indeed,  most  Americans  believed
that  parties  were  dangerous  because  they  looked  out
for themselves rather than serving the public interest.

But  a  shared  understanding  of  the  public  interest
collapsed in the face of sharp conflicts over Hamilton’s
fiscal policies. Most merchants and creditors supported
the  Federalist  Party,  as  did  wheat-exporting  slave-
holders  in  the  Tidewater  districts  of  the  Chesapeake.
The emerging Republican coalition included southern
tobacco  and  rice  planters,  debt-conscious  western
farmers,  Germans  and  Scots-Irish  in  the  southern
backcountry, and subsistence farmers in the Northeast.
Party identity crystallized in 1796. To prepare for
the  presidential  election,  Federalist  and  Republican
leaders  called  caucuses  in  Congress  and  conventions
in the states. They also mobilized popular support by
organizing  public  festivals  and  processions:  the
Federal ists  held  banquets  in  February  to  celebrate
Washington’s  birthday,  and  the  Republicans  marched
through the streets on July 4 to honor the Declaration
of Independence.

In the election, voters gave Federalists a majority in
Congress  and  made  John  Adams  president.  Adams
continued  Hamilton’s  pro-British  foreign  policy  and
strongly  criticized  French  seizures  of  American  mer-
chant  ships.  When  the  French  foreign  minister
Talleyrand solicited a loan and a bribe from American
diplomats  to  stop  the  seizures,  Adams  charged  that
Talleyrand’s agents, whom he dubbed X, Y, and Z, had
insulted America’s honor. In response to the XYZ Affair,
Congress cut off trade with France in 1798 and autho-
rized American privateering (licensing private ships to
seize  French  vessels).  This  undeclared  maritime  war
curtailed American trade with the French West Indies
and  resulted  in  the  capture  of  nearly  two  hundred
French and American merchant vessels.

The  Naturalization,  Alien,  and  Sedition  Acts  of
1798  As  Federalists  became  more  hostile  to  the
French Republic, they also took a  harder line against
their  Republican  critics.  When  Republican-minded

Toussaint L’Ouverture, Haitian Revolutionary
and Statesman

The American Revolution of 1776 constituted a victory for
republicanism; the Haitian revolt of the 1790s represented
a triumph of liberty over slavery and a demand for racial
equality. After leading the black army that ousted French
planters and British invaders from Haiti, Toussaint formed a
constitutional government in 1801. A year later, when French
troops invaded the island, he negotiated a treaty that halted
Haitian resistance in exchange for a pledge that the French
would not reinstate slavery. Subsequently, the French seized
Toussaint and imprisoned him in France, where he died in
1803. Snark/Art Resource, NY.

Philadelphia, and New York, while newspapers detailed
the  horrors  of  the  unfolding  war.  Many  slaveholders
panicked, fearful that the “contagion” of black libera-
tion  would  undermine  their  own  slave  regimes.  U.S.
policy  toward  the  rebellion  presented  a  knotty  prob-
lem. The first instinct of the Washington administra-
tion was to supply aid to the island’s white population.
Adams — strongly antislavery and no friend of France —
changed  course,  aiding  the  rebels  and  strengthening
commercial  ties.  Jefferson,  though  sympathetic  to
moral arguments against slavery, was himself a south-
ern slaveholder; he was, moreover, an ardent supporter
of France. When he became president, he cut off aid to
the  rebels,  imposed  a  trade  embargo,  and  refused  to
recognize an independent Haiti. For many Americans,
an independent nation of liberated citizen-slaves was a

