A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

The Haitian Revolution

and the Problem

of Race

The  slave  uprising  on  the  French  island  of  Saint-Domingue  triggered  inter-
national  war,  created  a  refugee  crisis,  and  ended  with  the  creation  of  a  new
republic. The American Revolution did all these things as well, yet the United
States did not support either the rebellion or the republic of Haiti.

Savannah City Council’s Resolution in Response to the
Haitian Uprising, 1795

Excerpts from the Constitution of 1801 Established by
the Central Assembly of Saint-Domingue

Whereas, from the mischiefs which the people of St.
Domingo, and other French islands, have experienced,
from the insurrection of their Negroes and People of
Colour, the precautions taken by the people of South
Carolina . . . to prevent the importation or landing of
any such Negroes or Mulattoes amongst them, and the
information the Citizens now assembled have received,
that a vessel is now lying at Cockspur, recently from
Kingston, with near one hundred Negroes on board,
whose landing may be dangerous to the inhabitants
of this state, with the daily expectation of many more;
therefore, to prevent the evils that may arise from suf-
fering people of this description, under any pretense
whatever, from being introduced amongst us, the Citi-
zens pledge themselves unanimously to support the City
Council in any salutary measures they may adopt[.]

Source: Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, Manuscripts, Archives and
Rare Books Division, Image ID 1243998, digitalgallery.nypl.org.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  How does the ﬁrst document express the fears of American
slaveholders? Why do you suppose the Savannah City Coun-
cil perceived Haitian refugees to be a danger?

Article 1. – Saint-Domingue in its entire expanse, and
Samana, La Tortue, La Gonave, Les Cayemites, L’Ile-a-
Vache, La Saone and other adjacent islands form the
territory of a single colony, which is part of the French
Empire, but ruled under particular laws. . . .

Article 3. – There cannot exist slaves on this territory,

servitude is therein forever abolished. All men are born,
live and die free and French.

Article 4. – All men, regardless of color, are eligible to

all employment.

Article 5. – There shall exist no distinction other than

those based on virtue and talent, and other superiority
afforded by law in the exercise of a public function.

The law is the same for all whether in punishment

or in protection.

Source: Haitian Constitution of 1801 (English), The Louverture Project,
 thelouvertureproject.org.

2.  How does the excerpt from the 1801 Constitution echo

themes of the American Revolution? What differences do
you see? Comparing the second document to the ﬁrst, how
would you say that the two revolutions impacted views of
race in Georgia and in Haiti?

immigrants from Ireland vehemently attacked Adams’s
policies, a Federalist pamphleteer responded  in kind:
“Were  I  president,  I  would  hang  them  for  otherwise
they  would  murder  me.”  To  silence  the  critics,  the
Federalists  enacted  three  coercive  laws  limiting  indi-
vidual  rights  and  threatening  the  fledgling  party  sys-
tem. The Naturalization Act lengthened the residency
requirement  for  American  citizenship  from  five  to
fourteen years, the Alien Act authorized the deportation
of foreigners, and the Sedition Act prohibited the pub-
lication of insults or malicious attacks on the president

or  members  of  Congress.  “He  that  is  not  for  us  is
against  us,”  thundered  the  Federalist  Gazette  of  the
United States. Using the Sedition Act, Federalist prose-
cutors arrested more than twenty Republican newspa-
per editors and politicians, accused them of sedition,
and convicted and jailed a number of them.

This  repression  sparked  a  constitutional  crisis.
Republicans charged that the Sedition Act violated the
First Amendment’s prohibition against “abridging the
freedom of speech, or of the press.” However, they did
not appeal to the Supreme Court because the Court’s

224

