CHAPTER 7

  Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820

225

power  to  review  congressional  legislation  was  uncer-
tain and because most of the justices were Federalists.
Instead, Madison and Jefferson looked to the state leg-
islatures.  At  their  urging,  the  Kentucky  and  Virginia
legislatures  issued  resolutions  in  1798  declaring  the
Alien  and  Sedition  Acts  to  be  “unauthoritative,  void,
and of no force.” The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions
set  forth  a  states’  rights  interpretation  of  the  Consti-
tution, asserting that the states had a “right to judge”
the legitimacy of national laws.

The conflict over the Sedition Act set the stage for
the  presidential  election  of  1800.  Jefferson,  once
opposed on principle to political parties, now asserted
that  they  could  “watch  and  relate  to  the  people”  the
activities  of  an  oppressive  government.  Meanwhile,
John  Adams  reevaluated  his  foreign  policy.  Rejecting
Hamilton’s  advice  to  declare  war  against  France  (and
benefit  from  the  resulting  upsurge  in  patriotism),
Adams put country ahead of party and used diplomacy
to end the maritime conflict.

The “Revolution of 1800”  The campaign of 1800
degenerated into a bitter, no-holds-barred contest. The
Federalists  launched  personal  attacks  on  Jefferson,
branding him an irresponsible pro-French radical and,
because  he  opposed  state  support  of  religion  in
Virginia,  “the  arch-apostle  of  irreligion  and  free
thought.”  Both  parties  changed  state  election  laws  to
favor  their  candidates,  and  rumors  circulated  of  a
Federalist plot to stage a military coup.

The election did not end these worries. Thanks to a
low  Federalist  turnout  in  Virginia  and  Pennsylvania
and  the  three-fifths  rule  (which  boosted  electoral
votes in the southern states), Jefferson won a narrow
73-to-65 victory over Adams  in the electoral college.
However, the Republican electors also gave 73 votes to
Aaron  Burr  of  New  York,  who  was  Jefferson’s  vice-
presidential running mate (Map 7.1). The Constitution
specified  that  in  the  case  of  a  tie  vote,  the  House  of
Representatives  would  choose  between  the  candi-
dates. For thirty-five rounds of balloting, Federalists in
the  House  blocked  Jefferson’s  election,  prompting
rumors  that  Virginia  would  raise  a  military  force  to
put him into office.

Ironically,  arch-Federalist  Alexander  Hamilton
ushered  in  a  more  democratic  era  by  supporting
Jefferson.  Calling  Burr  an  “embryo  Caesar”  and  the
“most unfit man in the United States for the office of
president,”  Hamilton  persuaded  key  Federalists  to
allow Jefferson’s election. The Federalists’ concern for
political stability also played a role. As Senator James
Bayard of Delaware explained, “It was admitted on all

1796

S
P
A
N
I
S
H
T
E
R
R
I
T
O
R
Y

Presidential elections
quickly became a central
focus of American political
life. Political leaders used
mental maps to envision
those areas likely to support
various candidates and to
map their election strategies
accordingly.

(cid:23)

(cid:20)(cid:21)

NORTHWEST
TERRITORY

(cid:20)(cid:23)

(cid:20)

(cid:26)

(cid:26)

(cid:20)(cid:25)

(cid:23)

(cid:25)

(cid:28)

(cid:22)

(cid:23)

(cid:22)

(cid:21)(cid:19)

(cid:20)

(cid:23)

(cid:20)

(cid:20)(cid:20)

(cid:27)

TERR. SOUTH
OF THE
OHIO RIVER

(cid:23)

FLO
RID
A

Electoral
  Vote
(cid:26)(cid:20)

Candidate

(cid:45)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:86)
(cid:11)(cid:41)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:12)
(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:45)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)
(cid:11)(cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:16)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:12)

(cid:25)(cid:27)

Presidential election maps usually show the strength of each state in the
electoral college. The number of electoral votes cast by a state is the sum
of the number of its senators (two) and its representatives in the U.S.
Congress. States gain or lose representatives depending on their
population, as determined each decade by the U.S. census. Consequently,
the number of a state’s electoral votes may change over time.

1800

(cid:23)

(cid:26)

(cid:25)

(cid:28)

(cid:22)

(cid:24)

(cid:20)(cid:21)

(cid:26)

(cid:24)

(cid:23)

S
P
A
N
I
S
H
T
E
R
R
I
T
O
R
Y

(cid:27)
NORTHWEST
TERR.

INDIANA
TERR.

(cid:23)

(cid:22)

MISSISSIPPI
TERRITORY

(cid:23)

(cid:21)(cid:20)

(cid:27)

(cid:27)

FLO
RID
A

(cid:20)(cid:25)

(cid:23)

Electoral
  Vote
(cid:26)(cid:22)

Candidate
(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:45)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)
(cid:11)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:12)
(cid:36)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:37)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:85)
(cid:11)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:12)
(cid:45)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:86)
(cid:11)(cid:41)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:12)
(cid:38)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:92)
(cid:11)(cid:41)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:12)
(cid:45)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:45)(cid:68)(cid:92)
(cid:11)(cid:41)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:12)

(cid:26)(cid:22)

(cid:25)(cid:24)

(cid:25)(cid:23)

(cid:20)

States may cast their electoral votes either by district (as, for example,
in North Carolina) or as a single statewide total. When Thomas Jefferson
and Aaron Burr both received 73 electoral votes, the House of
Representatives decided which one would be president.

MAP 7.1
The Presidential Elections of 1796 and 1800

Both elections pitted Federalist John Adams of
Massachusetts against Republican Thomas Jefferson of
Virginia, and both saw voters split along regional lines.
Adams carried every New England state and, reﬂecting
Federalist strength in maritime and commercial areas,
the eastern districts of the Middle Atlantic states;
Jefferson won most of the agricultural-based states of
the South and West (Kentucky and Tennessee). New
York was the pivotal swing state. It gave its 12 electoral
votes to Adams in 1796 and, thanks to the presence of
Aaron Burr on the Republican ticket, bestowed them on
Jefferson in 1800.

