226

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Why did Jefferson consider
his election in 1800 to be
revolutionary?

hands  that  we  must  risk  the
Constitution  and  a  Civil  War  or
take Mr. Jefferson.”

Jefferson  called  the  election
the “Revolution of 1800,” and so it
was.  The  bloodless  transfer  of
power  showed  that  popularly  elected  governments
could be changed in an orderly way, even in times of
bitter  partisan  conflict.  In  his  inaugural  address  in
1801,  Jefferson  praised  this  achievement,  declaring,
“We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists.”

A Republican Empire Is Born
In the Treaty of Paris of 1783, Great Britain gave up its
claims to the trans-Appalachian region and, said one
British diplomat, left the Indian nations “to the care of
their  [American]  neighbours.”  Care  was  hardly  the
right word: many white Americans wanted to destroy
native  communities.  “Cut  up  every  Indian  Cornfield
and burn every Indian town,” proclaimed Congressman
William  Henry  Drayton  of  South  Carolina,  so  that
their “nation be extirpated and the lands become the
property of the public.” Other leaders, including Henry
Knox,  Washington’s  first  secretary  of  war,  favored
assimilating native peoples into Euro-American soci-
ety. Knox proposed the division of tribal lands among
individual Indian families, who would become citizens
of  the  various  states.  Indians  resisted  both  forms  of
domination and fought to retain control of their lands
and cultures. In the ensuing struggle, the United States
emerged as an expansive power, determined to control
the future of the continent.

Sham Treaties and Indian Lands
As  in  the  past,  the  major  struggle  between  natives
and  Europeans  centered  on  land  rights.  Invoking  the
Paris  treaty  and  regarding  Britain’s  Indian  allies  as
 conquered  peoples,  the  U.S.  government  asserted
both  sovereignty  over  and  ownership  of  the  trans-
Appalachian west. Indian nations rejected both claims,
pointing  out  they  had  not  been  conquered  and  had
not  signed  the  Paris  treaty.  “Our  lands  are  our  life
and  our  breath,”  declared  Creek
chief Hallowing King; “if we part
with  them,  we  part  with  our
blood.”  Brushing  aside
such
 objections  and  threatening  mili-
tary  action,  U.S.  commissioners
forced  the  pro-British  Iroquois

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
Why did the United States
go to war against western
Indians so quickly after the
Revolution?

and
peoples — Mohawks,  Onondagas,  Cayugas,
Senecas — to  cede  huge  tracts  in  New  York  and
Pennsylvania in the Treaty of Fort Stanwix (1784). New
York land speculators used liquor and bribes to take a
million  more  acres,  confining  the  once  powerful
Iroquois to reservations — essentially colonies of sub-
ordinate peoples.

American  negotiators  used  similar  tactics  to  grab
Ohio  Valley  lands.  At  the  Treaties  of  Fort  McIntosh
(1785) and Fort Finney (1786), they pushed the Chip-
pewas, Delawares, Ottawas, Wyandots, and Shawnees
to  cede  most  of  the  future  state  of  Ohio.  The  tribes
quickly repudiated the agreements, justifiably claiming
they were made under duress. Recognizing the failure
of  these  agreements,  American  negotiators  arranged
for a comprehensive agreement at Fort Harmar (1789),
but  it,  too,  failed.  To  defend  their  lands,  these  tribes
joined  with  the  Miami  and  Potawatomi  Indians  to
form  the  Western  Confederacy.  Led  by  Miami  chief
Little Turtle, confederacy warriors crushed American
expeditionary forces sent by President Washington in
1790 and 1791.

The  Treaty  of  Greenville  Fearing  an  alliance
between  the  Western  Confederacy  and  the  British  in
Canada, Washington doubled the size of the U.S. Army
and ordered General “Mad Anthony” Wayne to lead a
new expedition. In August 1794, Wayne defeated the
confederacy  in  the  Battle  of  Fallen  Timbers  (near
present-day  Toledo,  Ohio).  However,  continuing
Indian  resistance  forced  a  compromise.  In  the  Treaty
of  Greenville  (1795),  American  negotiators  acknowl-
edged Indian ownership of the land, and, in return for
various  payments,  the  Western  Confederacy  ceded
most of Ohio (Map 7.2). The Indian peoples also agreed
to  accept  American  sovereignty,  placing  themselves
“under  the  protection  of  the  United  States,  and  no
other Power whatever.” These American advances caused
Britain to agree, in Jay’s Treaty (1795), to reduce its trade
and  military  aid  to  Indians  in  the  trans-Appalachian
region.

The  Greenville  treaty  sparked  a  wave  of  white
migration.  Kentucky  already  had  a  population  of
73,000  in  1790,  and  in  1792  it  was  admitted  to  the
Union  as  the  fifteenth  state  (Vermont  entered  a  year
earlier). By 1800, more than 375,000 people had moved
into the Ohio and Tennessee valleys; in 1805, the new
state of Ohio alone had more than 100,000 residents.
Thousands more farm families moved into the future
states  of  Indiana  and  Illinois,  sparking  new  conflicts
with  native  peoples  over  land  and  hunting  rights.
Between 1790 and 1810, farm families settled as much

