CHAPTER 7

  Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820

227

MAP 7.2
Indian Cessions and State Formation,
1776–1840

By virtue of the Treaty of Paris
(1783) with Britain, the United
States claimed sovereignty over
the entire trans-Appalachian west.
The Western Confederacy contested
this claim, but the U.S. government
upheld it with military force. By 1840,
armed diplomacy had forced most
Native American peoples to move
west of the Mississippi River. White
settlers occupied their lands, formed
territorial governments, and eventu-
ally entered the Union as members
of separate — and equal — states. By
1860, the trans-Appalachian region
constituted an important economic
and political force in American
national life.

C A N A D A

To U.S. from Britain
by Treaty of 1818

Red River
Basin

L. Superior

Ft. Michilimackinac

(cid:9)

SAUK

FOX

DAKOTA
(SIOUX)

KICKAPOO

Missouri
R.

IOWA

L.Huron

MICH.
1837

n
a
g
i
h
c
i

M
.
L

O
G
A
B
E
N
N
I
W

POTAWATOMI
(cid:9)
Ft. Detroit

L.Erie

Fallen Timbers
1794

(cid:8)

(cid:8)

Harmar's Defeat
1790

(cid:8)

ERIE

MIAMI

(cid:8)

OHIO
1803
St. Clair's
Defeat
1791

MAINE
1820

VT.

N.H.

Ft. Stanwix

L.Ontario
(cid:9)
Ft. Niagara

(cid:9)
N.Y.

MASS.

CONN.

PA.

MD.

N.J.

DEL.

R.I.

N

W

E

S

PAWNEE

Tippecanoe
1811

ILLINOIS
ILL.
1818

St. Louis

ARAPAHO

OSAGE

MO.
1821

QUAPAW

ARK.
1836

WICHITA

R.
pi

Mississip

CHICKASAW

ALA.
1819

CADDO

CHOCTAW

NATCHEZ

LA.
1812

Natchez

IND.
1816

OhioR.
SHAWNEE

KY.
1792

TENN.
1796

TennesseeR.

MISS.
1817

(cid:8)
Horseshoe
Bend
1814

MOBILE

L

O

U

I

S

I

A

N

A

Lexington

VA.

N.C.

YUCHI
CHEROKEE

S.C.

GA.

CREEK

New Orleans

TIMUCUA

Gulf of Mexico

SEMINOLE

MEXICO

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

Indian Cessions

(cid:8)
(cid:9)

Before 1784
1784–1820

After 1820
Battle
Fort
Treaty of Paris,
1783
Greenville Treaty,
1795

land as they had during the entire colonial period. The
United  States  “is  a  country  in  flux,”  a  visiting  French
aristocrat  observed  in  1799,  and  “that  which  is  true
today  as  regards  its  population,  its  establishments,
its  prices,  its  commerce  will  not  be  true  six  months
from now.”

Assimilation  Rejected  To  dampen  further  con-
flicts, the  U.S. government encouraged  Native Amer-
icans to assimilate into white society. The goal, as one
Kentucky Protestant minister put it, was to make the
Indian “a  farmer, a citizen of the United States, and a
Christian.”  Most  Indians  rejected  wholesale  assimila-
tion;  even  those  who  joined  Christian  churches
retained many ancestral values and religious beliefs. To
think  of  themselves  as  individuals  or  members  of  a
nuclear  family,  as  white  Americans  were  demanding,
meant repudiating the clan, the very essence of Indian
life.  To  preserve  “the  old  Indian  way,”  many  native
communities  expelled  white  missionaries  and  forced
Christianized Indians to participate in tribal rites. As
a  Munsee  prophet  declared,  “There  are  two  ways  to
God, one for the whites and one for the Indians.”

A few Indian leaders sought a middle path in which
new  beliefs  overlapped  with  old  practices.  Among
the  Senecas,  the  prophet  Handsome  Lake  encouraged
traditional  animistic  rituals  that  gave  thanks  to  the
sun, the earth, water, plants, and animals. But he included
Christian  elements  in  his  teachings — the  concepts  of
heaven  and  hell  and  an  emphasis  on  personal  moral-
ity — to deter his followers from alcohol, gambling, and
witchcraft.  Handsome  Lake’s  teachings  divided  the
Senecas into hostile factions. Led by Chief Red Jacket,
traditionalists condemned European culture as evil and
demanded a complete return to ancestral ways.

Most Indians also rejected the efforts of American
missionaries to turn warriors into farmers and women
into  domestic  helpmates.  Among  eastern  woodland
peoples,  women  grew  corn,  beans,  and  squash — the
mainstays  of  the  Indians’  diet — and  land  cultivation
rights  passed  through  the  female  line.  Consequently,
women  exercised  considerable  political  influence,
which they were eager to retain. Nor were Indian men
interested in becoming farmers. When war raiding and
hunting were no longer possible, many turned to graz-
ing cattle and sheep.

