228

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

Treaty Negotiations at Greenville, 1795

In 1785, Indian tribes in the Northwest Territory formed the Western Confederacy to prevent white settle-
ment north of the Ohio River. After Indian triumphs in battles in the early 1790s, an American victory at
the Battle of Fallen Timbers (1794) and the subsequent Treaty of Greenville (1795) opened up the region
for white farmers. However, the treaty recognized many Indian rights because it was negotiated between
relative equals on the battleﬁeld. The artist suggests this equality: notice the height and stately bearing of
the Indian leaders — ninety of whom signed the document — and their placement slightly in front of General
Anthony Wayne and his ofﬁcers. Chicago History Museum.

Migration and the Changing
Farm Economy
Native  American  resistance  slowed  the  advance  of
white  settlers  but  did  not  stop  it.  Nothing  “short  of
a  Chinese  Wall,  or  a  line  of  Troops,”  Washington
declared, “will restrain . . . the Incroachment of Settlers,
upon the Indian Territory.” During the 1790s, two great
streams of migrants moved out of the southern states
(Map 7.3).

Southern Migrants  One stream, composed primar-
ily  of  white  tenant  farmers  and  struggling  yeomen
families,  flocked  through  the  Cumberland  Gap  into

Kentucky and Tennessee. “Boundless settlements open
a door for our citizens to run off and leave us,” a wor-
ried Maryland landlord lamented, “depreciating all our
landed property and disabling us from paying taxes.”
In fact, many migrants were fleeing from this planter-
controlled  society.  They  wanted  more  freedom  and
hoped to prosper by growing cotton and hemp, which
were in great demand.

Many  settlers  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee  lacked
ready  cash  to  buy  land.  Like  the  North  Carolina
Regulators  in  the  1770s,  poorer  migrants  claimed  a
customary right to occupy “back waste vacant Lands”
sufficient “to provide a subsistence to themselves and
their Posterity.” Virginia legislators, who administered

