CHAPTER 7

  Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820

229

MAP 7.3
Regional Cultures Move West,
1790–1820

By 1790, four core cultures had
developed in the long-settled states
along the Atlantic seaboard. Between
1790 and 1820, migrants from these
four regions carried their cultures
into the trans-Appalachian west. New
England customs and institutions were
a dominant inﬂuence in upstate New
York and along the Great Lakes, while
the Lower South’s hierarchical system
of slavery and heavy concentration
of African Americans shaped the
character of the new states along the
Gulf of Mexico. The pattern of cultural
diffusion was more complex in the
Ohio and Tennessee river valleys, which
were settled by migrants from various
core regions.

Mississippi

R

.

MISSOURI
TERRITORY

Missouri R.

ArkansasR.
ARKANSAS
TERRITORY
1819–1824

L.Superior

C A N A D A

ichigan

L.Hur

o
n

M
.
L
MICHIGAN TERRITORY
1818–1834

L.Ontario

N.Y.

L.Erie

R.

St.Lawrence

VT.
1791

Huds

o
n
R
.

N.H.

MASS.

CONN.

ME.
1820

R.I.

INDIANA
1816

OHIO
1803

ILLINOIS
1818

S
N
I
A
T
N
U
O
M

VA.

N.C.

S.C.

OhioR.

KENTUCKY
1792

Cumberland
Gap

N
A
I
H
C
A
L
A
P
P
A

GA.

TENNESSEE
1796

TennesseeR.

MISS.
1817

ALABAMA
1819

LOUISIANA
1812

C
h
a
t
t
a
h
o
o
c
h
e
e
R

.

FLORIDA
TERRITORY
1819–1845

Gulf of Mexico

PA.

N.J.

MD.

Potom
R.

a
c

DEL.

N

W

E

S

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

0

0

100

200 miles

100

200 kilometers

Cultural Core Areas

New England

Mid-Atlantic

Chesapeake

Lower South

Direction of cultural diffusion

landlessness — and  opposition

the  Kentucky  Territory,  had  a  more  elitist  vision.
Although they allowed poor settlers to buy up to 1,400
acres  of  land  at  reduced  prices,  they  sold  or  granted
huge  tracts  of  100,000  acres  to  twenty-one  groups  of
speculators and leading men. In 1792, this landed elite
owned  one-fourth  of  the  state,  while  half  the  white
men owned no land and lived as quasi-legal squatters
or tenant farmers.
Widespread

to
slavery — prompted a new migration across the Ohio
River  into  the  future  states  of  Ohio,  Indiana,  and
Illinois. In a free community, thought Peter Cartwright,
a Methodist lay preacher from southwestern Kentucky
who moved to Illinois, “I would be entirely clear of the
evil  of  slavery . . . [and]  could  raise  my  children  to
work where work was not thought a degradation.” Yet
land distribution in Ohio was almost exactly as unequal
as in Kentucky: in 1810, a quarter of its real estate was
owned by 1 percent of the population, while more than
half of its white men were landless.

Meanwhile,  a  second  stream  of  southern  planters
and slaves from the Carolinas moved along the coastal
plain  toward  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  Some  set  up  new

estates in the interior of Georgia and South Carolina,
while others moved into the future states of Alabama,
Mississippi, and Louisiana. “The Alabama Feaver rages
here  with  great  violence,”  a  North  Carolina  planter
remarked,  “and  has  carried  off  vast  numbers  of  our
Citizens.”

Cotton was the key to this migratory surge. Around
1750, the demand for raw wool and cotton increased
dramatically as water-powered spinning jennies, weav-
ing mules, and other technologi-
cal  innovations  of  the  Industrial
Revolution  boosted  textile  pro-
duction in England. South Caro-
lina  and  Georgia  planters  began
growing  cotton,  and  American
inventors, including Connecticut-
born Eli Whitney, built machines
(called  gins)
efficiently
extracted seeds from its strands. To grow more cotton,
white  planters  imported  about  115,000  Africans
between  1776  and  1808,  when  Congress  cut  off  the
Atlantic  slave  trade.  The  cotton  boom  financed  the
rapid  settlement  of  Mississippi  and  Alabama — in  a

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Why were westward
migration and agricul-
tural improvement so
widespread in the late
eighteenth and early nine-
teenth centuries?

that

