230

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

An Indian Log House in Georgia, 1791

The Indian peoples of the southeastern United States — the Cherokees, Creeks, Choctaws,
and Chickasaws — quickly adopted European practices that ﬁt easily into their relatively settled,
agricultural-based way of life. This sturdy Creek log cabin was based on a Scots-Irish or German
design and sat adjacent to the family’s cornﬁelds, visible in the background. Library of Congress.

single  year,  a  government  land  office  in  Huntsville,
Alabama, sold $7 million of uncleared land — and the
two  states  entered  the  Union  in  1817  and  1819,
respectively.

Exodus from New England  As southerners moved
across  the  Appalachians  and  along  the  Gulf  Coast,  a
third stream of migrants flowed out of the overcrowded
communities  of  New  England.  Previous  generations
of  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut  farm  families  had
moved  north  and  east,  settling  New  Hampshire,
Vermont,  and  Maine.  Now  New  England  farmers
moved west. Seeking land for their children, thousands
of  parents  migrated  to  New  York.  “The  town  of
Herkimer,” noted one traveler, “is entirely populated by
families  come  from  Connecticut.”  By  1820,  almost
800,000  New  Englanders  lived  in  a  string  of  settle-
ments  stretching  from  Albany  to  Buffalo,  and  many
others  had  traveled  on  to  Ohio  and  Indiana.  Soon,
much  of  the  Northwest  Territory  consisted  of  New
England communities that had moved inland.

In  New  York,  as  in  Kentucky  and  Ohio,  well-
connected  speculators  snapped  up  much  of  the  best
land,  leasing  farms  to  tenants  for  a  fee.  Imbued  with
the  “homestead”  ethic,  many  New  England  families

preferred to buy farms. They signed contracts with the
Holland Land Company, a Dutch-owned syndicate of
speculators, that allowed settlers to pay for their farms
as they worked them, or moved west again in an elusive
search for land on easy terms.

Innovation on Eastern Farms  The new farm econ-
omy  in  New  York,  Ohio,  and  Kentucky  forced  major
changes in eastern agriculture. Unable to compete with
lower-priced western grains, farmers in New England
switched  to  potatoes,  which  were  high  yielding  and
nutritious. To make up for the labor of sons and daugh-
ters who had moved inland, Middle Atlantic farmers
bought more efficient farm equipment. They replaced
metal-tipped wooden plows with cast-iron models that
dug deeper and required a single yoke of oxen instead
of two. Such changes in crop mix and technology kept
production high.

Easterners  also  adopted  the  progressive  farming
methods  touted  by  British  agricultural  reformers.
“Improvers”  in  Pennsylvania  doubled  their  average
yield per acre by rotating their crops. Yeomen farmers
raised sheep and sold the wool to textile manufactur-
ers. Many farmers adopted a year-round planting cycle,
sowing corn in the spring for animal fodder and then

