CHAPTER 7

  Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820

231

planting  winter  wheat  in  September  for  market  sale.
Women  and  girls  milked  the  family  cows  and  made
butter  and  cheese  to  sell  in  the  growing  towns  and
cities.

Whether  hacking  fields  out  of  western  forests  or
carting manure to replenish eastern soils, farmers now
worked harder and longer, but their increased produc-
tivity  brought  them  a  better  standard  of  living.
European demand for American produce was high in
these years, and westward migration — the settlement
and exploitation of Indian lands — boosted the farm-
ing economy throughout the country.

The Jefferson Presidency
From 1801 to 1825, three Republicans from Virginia —
Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and James Monroe —
each  served  two  terms  as  president.  Supported  by
farmers in the South and West and strong Republican
majorities in Congress, this “Virginia Dynasty” com-
pleted  what  Jefferson  had  called  the  Revolution  of
1800. It reversed many Federalist policies and actively
supported westward expansion.

When Jefferson took office in 1801, he inherited an
old international conflict. Beginning in the 1780s, the
Barbary  States  of  North  Africa  had  raided  merchant
ships in  the  Mediterranean,  and  like  many  European
nations, the United States had paid an annual bribe —
massive in relation to the size of the federal budget — to
protect its vessels. Initially Jefferson refused to pay this
“tribute” and ordered the U.S. Navy to attack the pirates’
home ports. After four years of intermittent fighting, in
which  the  United  States  bombarded  Tripoli  and  cap-
tured  the  city  of  Derna,  the  Jefferson  administration
cut  its  costs.  It  signed  a  peace  treaty  that  included  a
ransom  for  returned  prisoners,  and  Algerian  ships
were soon taking American sailors hostage again.

At  home,  Jefferson  inherited  a  national  judiciary
filled with Federalist appointees, including the formi-
dable John Marshall of Virginia, the new chief justice
of the Supreme Court. To add more Federalist judges,
the  outgoing  Federalist  Congress  had  passed  the
Judiciary  Act  of  1801.  The  act  created  sixteen  new
judgeships and various other positions, which President
Adams  filled  at  the  last  moment  with  “midnight
appointees.” The Federalists “have retired into the judi-
ciary as a stronghold,” Jefferson complained, “and from
that battery all the works of Republicanism are to be
beaten down and destroyed.”

Jefferson’s fears were soon realized. When Repub-
lican legislatures in Kentucky and Virginia repudiated
the  Alien  and  Sedition  Acts  as  unconstitutional,

Marshall  declared  that  only  the  Supreme  Court  held
the power of constitutional review. The Court claimed
this authority for itself when James Madison, the new
secretary of state, refused to deliver the commission of
William  Marbury,  one  of  Adams’s  midnight  appoin-
tees. In Marbury v. Madison (1803), Marshall asserted
that Marbury had the right to the appointment but that
the  Court  did  not  have  the  constitutional  power  to
enforce  it.  In  defining  the  Court’s  powers,  Marshall
voided a section of the Judiciary Act of 1789, in effect
asserting the Court’s authority to review congressional
legislation and interpret the Constitution. “It is emphat-
ically the province and duty of the judicial department
to  say  what  the  law  is,”  the  chief  justice  declared,
directly challenging the Republican view that the state
legislatures had that power.

Ignoring this setback, Jefferson and the Republicans
reversed other Federalist policies. When the Alien and
Sedition Acts expired in 1801, Congress branded them
unconstitutional  and  refused  to  extend  them.  It  also
amended the Naturalization Act, restoring the original
waiting  period  of  five  years  for  resident  aliens  to
become citizens. Charging the Federalists with grossly
expanding the national government’s size and power,
Jefferson  had  the  Republican  Congress  shrink  it.  He
abolished  all  internal  taxes,  including  the  excise  tax
that  had  sparked  the  Whiskey  Rebellion  of  1794.  To
quiet  Republican  fears  of  a  military  coup,  Jefferson
reduced  the  size  of  the  permanent  army.  He  also
secured  repeal  of  the  Judiciary  Act  of  1801,  ousting
forty  of  Adams’s  midnight  appointees.  Still,  Jefferson
retained competent Federalist officeholders, removing
only  69  of  433  properly  appointed  Federalists  during
his eight years as president.

Jefferson likewise governed tactfully in fiscal affairs.
He tolerated the economically important Bank of the
United  States,  which  he  had  once  condemned  as
unconstitutional. But he chose as his secretary of the
treasury  Albert  Gallatin,  a  fiscal  conservative  who
believed that the national debt was “an evil of the first
magnitude.”  By  limiting  expenditures  and  using  cus-
toms  revenue  to  redeem  government  bonds,  Gallatin
reduced the debt from $83 million in 1801 to $45 mil-
lion in 1812. With Jefferson and Gallatin at the helm,
the  nation’s  fiscal  affairs  were  no  longer  run  in  the
interests of northeastern creditors and merchants.

Jefferson and the West
Jefferson had long championed settlement of the West.
He celebrated the yeoman farmer in Notes on the State
of  Virginia  (1785);  wrote  one  of  the  Confederation’s

