232

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

America in the Middle East, 1804

To protect American merchants from capture and captivity in the Barbary States, President Thomas Jefferson
sent in the U.S. Navy. This 1846 lithograph, created by the famous ﬁrm of Currier & Ives, depicts one of the
three attacks on the North African port of Tripoli by Commodore Edward Preble in August 1804. As the USS
Constitution and other large warships lob shells into the city, small American gunboats defend the ﬂeet from
Tripolitan gunboats. “Our loss in Killed & Wounded has been considerable,” Preble reported, and “the Enemy
must have suffered very much . . . among their Shipping and on shore.” The Granger Collection, New York.

western  land  ordinances;  and  supported  Pinckney’s
Treaty (1795), the agreement between the United States
and  Spain  that  reopened  the  Mississippi  River  to
American trade and allowed settlers to export crops via
the Spanish-held port of New Orleans.

As president, Jefferson pursued policies that made it
easier  for  farm  families  to  acquire  land.  In  1796,  a
Federalist-dominated  Congress  had  set  the  price  of
land in the national domain at $2 per acre; by the 1830s,
Jefferson-inspired Republican Congresses had enacted
more than three hundred laws that cut the cost to $1.25,
eased credit terms, and allowed illegal squatters to buy
their farms. Eventually, in the Homestead Act of 1862,
Congress gave farmsteads to settlers for free.

The Louisiana Purchase
International events chal-
lenged  Jefferson’s  vision  of  westward  expansion.  In

1799, Napoleon Bonaparte seized power in France and
sought  to  reestablish  France’s  American  empire.  In
1801, he coerced Spain into signing a secret treaty that
returned Louisiana to France and restricted American
access  to  New  Orleans,  violating  Pinckney’s  Treaty.
Napoleon also launched an invasion to restore French
rule in Saint-Domingue. It  was once the richest sugar
colony in the Americas, but its civil war had ruined the
economy and cost France a fortune. Napoleon wanted
to  crush  the  rebellion,  restore  its  planter  class,  and
“destroy the new Algiers that has been growing up in
the middle of America.”

Napoleon’s actions in Haiti and Louisiana prompted
Jefferson  to  question  his  pro-French  foreign  policy.
“The day that France takes possession of New Orleans,
we must marry ourselves to the British fleet and nation,”
the  president  warned,  dispatching  James  Monroe  to

