CHAPTER 7

  Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820

233

Britain to negotiate an alliance. To keep the Mississippi
River  open  to  western  farmers,  Jefferson  told  Robert
Livingston, the American minister in Paris, to negoti-
ate the purchase of New Orleans.

Jefferson’s  diplomacy  yielded  a  magnificent  prize:
the entire territory of Louisiana. By 1802, the French
invasion of  Saint-Domingue  was  faltering  in  the  face
of  disease  and  determined  black  resistance,  a  new
war  threatened  in  Europe,  and  Napoleon  feared  an
American invasion of Louisiana. Acting with charac-
teristic decisiveness, the French ruler offered to sell the
entire  territory  of  Louisiana  for  $15  million  (about
$500 million today). “We have lived long,” Livingston
remarked to Monroe as they concluded the Louisiana
Purchase in 1803, “but this is the noblest work of our
lives.”

The Louisiana Purchase forced Jefferson to recon-
sider  his  strict  interpretation  of  the  Constitution.  He
had  long  believed  that  the  national  government  pos-
sessed only the powers expressly delegated to it in the
Constitution,  but  there  was  no  provision  for  adding
new  territory.  So  Jefferson  pragmatically  accepted  a
loose  interpretation  of  the  Constitution  and  used  its
treaty-making  powers  to  complete  the  deal  with
France. The new western lands, Jefferson wrote, would
be “a means of tempting all our Indians on the East side
of the Mississippi to remove to the West.”

Secessionist Schemes  The acquisition of Louisiana
brought  new  political  problems.  Some  New  England
Federalists, fearing that western expansion would hurt
their  region  and  party,  talked  openly  of  leaving  the
Union  and  forming  a  confederacy  of  northeastern
states.  The  secessionists  won  the  support  of  Aaron
Burr,  the  ambitious  vice  president.  After  Alexander
Hamilton  accused  Burr  of  planning  to  destroy  the
Union, the two fought an illegal pistol duel that led to
Hamilton’s death.

This tragedy propelled Burr into another secession-
ist scheme, this time in the Southwest. When his term
as  vice  president  ended  in  1805,  Burr  moved  west  to
avoid  prosecution.  There,  he  conspired  with  General
James  Wilkinson,  the  military  governor  of  the  Loui-
siana Territory, either to seize territory in New Spain
or  to  establish  Louisiana  as  a  separate  nation.  But
Wilkinson, himself a Spanish spy and incipient traitor,
betrayed Burr and arrested him. In a highly politicized
trial presided over by Chief Justice John Marshall, the
jury acquitted Burr of treason.

The Louisiana Purchase had increased party con-
flict and generated secessionist schemes in both New
England and the Southwest. Such sectional differences

continue,

challenging
would
Madison’s argument in “Federalist
No.  10”  that  a  large  and  diverse
republic  was  more  stable  than  a
small one.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How was Jefferson’s agrar-
ian vision reﬂected in his
policies affecting western
lands?

Lewis  and  Clark  Meet  the
Mandans and Sioux  A scientist as well as a states-
man,  Jefferson  wanted  information  about  Louisiana:
its physical features, plant and animal life, and native
peoples.  He  was  also  worried  about  intruders:  the
British-run  Hudson’s  Bay  Company  and  Northwest
Company were actively trading for furs on the upper
Missouri River. So in 1804, Jefferson sent his personal
secretary, Meriwether Lewis, to explore the region with
William Clark, an army officer. From St. Louis, Lewis,
Clark, and their party of American soldiers and fron-
tiersmen  traveled  up  the  Missouri  for  1,000  miles  to
the  fortified,  earth-lodge  towns  of  the  Mandan  and
Hidatsa  peoples  (near  present-day  Bismarck,  North
Dakota), where they spent the winter.

The  Mandans  lived  primarily  by  horticulture,
growing  corn,  beans,  and  squash.  They  had  acquired
horses  by  supplying  food  to  nomadic  Plains  Indians
and  secured  guns,  iron  goods,  and  textiles  by  selling
buffalo  hides  and  dried  meat  to  European  traders.
However,  the  Mandans  (and  neighboring  Arikaras)
had been hit hard by the smallpox epidemics that swept
across the Great Plains in 1779–1781 and 1801–1802.
Now  they  were  threatened  by  Sioux  peoples:  Tetons,
Yanktonais,  and  Oglalas.  Originally,  the  Sioux  had
lived  in  the  prairie  and  lake  region  of  northern
Minnesota. As their numbers rose and fish and game
grew  scarce,  the  Sioux  moved  westward,  acquired
horses,  and  hunted buffalo,  living  as  nomads  in  por-
table skin tepees. The Sioux became ferocious fighters
who  tried  to  reduce  the  Mandans  and  other  farming
tribes  to  subject  peoples.  According  to  Lewis  and
Clark, they were the “pirates of the Missouri.” Soon the
Sioux  would  dominate  the  buffalo  trade  throughout
the upper Missouri region.

In  the  spring  of  1805,  Lewis  and  Clark  began  an
epic 1,300-mile trek into unknown country. Their party
now included Toussaint Charbonneau, a French Cana-
d ian fur trader, and his Shoshone wife, Sacagawea, who
served  as  a  guide  and  translator.  After  following  the
Missouri  River  to  its  source  on  the  Idaho-Montana
border,  they  crossed  the  Rocky  Mountains,  and —
venturing  far  beyond  the  Louisiana  Purchase —
traveled down the Columbia River to the Pacific Ocean.
Nearly  everywhere,  Indian  peoples  asked  for  guns  so
they could defend themselves from other armed tribes.

