234

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

A Mandan Village

This Mandan settlement in
North Dakota, painted by
George Catlin around 1837,
resembled those in which the
Lewis and Clark expedition
spent the winter of 1804–
1805. Note the palisade of
logs that surrounds the village,
as protec tion from the Sioux
and other marauding Plains
peoples, and the solidly built
mud lodges that provided warm
shelter from the bitter cold of
winter. Smithsonian American Art
Museum, Washington, D.C./Art
Resource, NY.

In 1806, Lewis and Clark capped off their pathbreaking
expedition by providing Jefferson with the first maps of
the immense wilderness and a detailed account of its
natural  resources  and  inhabitants  (Map  7.4).  Their
report prompted some Americans to envision a nation
that would span the continent.

The War of 1812 and the
Transformation of Politics
The Napoleonic Wars that ravaged Europe after 1802
brought  new  attacks  on  American  merchant  ships.
American leaders struggled desperately to protect the
nation’s commerce while avoiding war. When this effort
finally failed, it sparked dramatic political changes that
destroyed the Federalist Party and split the Republicans
into National and Jeffersonian factions.

Conflict in the Atlantic and the West
As Napoleon conquered European countries, he cut off
their  commerce  with  Britain  and  seized  American
merchant  ships  that  stopped  in  British  ports.  The
British ministry responded with a naval blockade and
seized  American  vessels  carrying  sugar  and  molasses
from  the  French  West  Indies.  The  British  navy  also
searched American merchant ships for British deserters
and used these raids to replenish its crews, a practice

known  as  impressment.  Between  1802  and  1811,
British  naval  officers  impressed  nearly  8,000  sailors,
including many U.S. citizens. In 1807, American anger
boiled  over  when  a  British  warship  attacked  the  U.S.
Navy vessel Chesapeake, killing three, wounding eigh-
teen,  and  seizing  four  alleged  deserters.  “Never  since
the battle of Lexington have I seen this country in such
a state of exasperation as at present,” Jefferson declared.

The Embargo of 1807  To protect American inter-
ests,  Jefferson  pursued  a  policy  of  peaceful  coercion.
The  Embargo  Act  of  1807 prohibited American ships
from leaving their home ports until Britain and France
stopped restricting U.S. trade. A drastic maneuver, the
embargo  overestimated  the  reliance  of  Britain  and
France on American shipping and underestimated the
resistance  of  merchants,  who  feared  the  embargo
would ruin them. In fact, the embargo cut the American
gross national product by 5 percent and weakened the
entire economy. Exports plunged from $108 million in
1806 to $22 million in 1808, hurting farmers as well as
merchants. “All was noise and bustle” in New York City
before  the  embargo,  one  visitor  remarked;  afterward,
everything was closed up as if “a malignant fever was
raging in the place.”

Despite  popular  discontent  over  the  embargo,
voters  elected  Republican  James  Madison  to  the
presidency  in  1808.  A  powerful  advocate  for  the
Constitution, the architect of the Bill of Rights, and a
prominent  congressman  and  party  leader,  Madison

