CHAPTER 7

  Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820

235

GROS VENTRE

CROW

Columbia R.

OREGON
(Claimed by Britain, Spain,
and the United States)

Snake R.

CHEYENNE

Missouri R.

SANTEE
SIOUX

IOWA

LOUISIANA  PURCHASE

ARAPAHO

KANSA

MISSOURI

(cid:9)

San Francisco
ALTA
CALIFORNIA

San Luis Obispo
(cid:9)

Santa Barbara

Colorado R.

N

E
W

(cid:9)

Los Angeles

(cid:9)

San Diego

PACIFIC
OCEAN

Population Density, 1800
U.S. nationals per sq. mile

S

P

A

I

N

(cid:9)

El Paso

Under 2
2 to 18

18 to 45
Over 45

Chihuahua

Explorers’ Routes

Lewis and Clark, 1804–1806
Pike, 1805–1806
Pike, 1806–1807
(cid:9)

Missions

Forts

Taos
(cid:9)

Santa Fe

KIOWA

OSAGE

Arkansas  R.

Red R.

i R.
p
p
si
Missis

WICHITA

Nacogdoches

TEXAS

Rio Grande

San Antonio

COAHUILA

B R I T I S H

C A N A D A

L. Superior

L. Huro

n

L. Ontario

N.Y.

L. Erie

ERIE

OHIO

PA.

MD.

KICKAPOO

POTAWATOMI

SAUK

n
a
g
i
h
c
i

FOX

M
.
L

O
G
A
B
E
N
N
I
W
INDIANA
MI
TERRITORY
ILLINOIS MIA
Ohio R.

St. Louis

VA.

N.C.

S.C.

CHEROKEE
YUCHI

GA.

CREEK

KY.

SHAWNEE

TENN.

CHICKASAW

MISSISSIPPI
TERRITORY
CHOCTAW

NATCHEZ

S PA N I S H

New Orleans

Gulf of Mexico

TIMUCUA

FLORIDA

SEMINOLE

ME.
(MASS.)

VT.

N.H.

MASS.

R.I.
CONN.

N.J.

DEL.

N

W

E

S

ATLANTIC
OC EAN

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

CUBA

MAP 7.4
U.S. Population Density in 1803 and the Louisiana Purchase

When the United States purchased Louisiana from France in 1803, much of the land to its east — the
vast territory between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River — remained in Indian
hands. The equally vast lands beyond the Mississippi were virtually unknown to Anglo-Americans,
even after the epic explorations of Meriwether Lewis and William Clark. Still, President Jefferson
predicted quite accurately that the huge Mississippi River Valley “from its fertility . . . will ere long
yield half of our whole produce, and contain half of our whole population.”

had  served  the  nation well.  But  John  Beckley,  a  loyal
Republican, worried that Madison would be “too timid
and indecisive as a statesman,” and events proved him
right.  Acknowledging  the  embargo’s  failure,  Madison
replaced it with new economic restrictions, which also
failed to protect American commerce.

Western War Hawks  Republican congressmen from
the  West  were  certain  that  Britain  was  the  primary
offender. They pointed to its trade with Indians in the
Ohio  River  Valley  in  violation  of  the  Treaty  of  Paris
and  Jay’s  Treaty.  Bolstered  by  British  guns  and  sup-
plies,  the  Shawnee  war  chief  Tecumseh  revived  the
Western Confederacy in 1809. His brother, the prophet
Tenskwatawa, provided the confederacy with a power-
ful nativist ideology. He urged Indian peoples to shun

Americans,  “the  children  of  the  Evil  Spirit . . . who
have  taken  away  your  lands”;  renounce  alcohol;  and
return to traditional ways. The Shawnee leaders found
their  greatest  support  among  Kickapoo,  Potawatomi,
Winnebago, Ottawa, and Chippewa warriors: Indians
of the western Great Lakes who had so far been largely
shielded from the direct effects of U.S. westward expan-
sion.  They  flocked  to  Tenskwatawa’s  holy  village,
Prophetstown, in the Indiana Territory.

As Tecumseh mobilized the western Indian peoples
for  war,  William  Henry  Harrison,  the  governor  of
the Indiana Territory, decided on a preemptive strike.
In  November  1811,  when  Tecumseh  went  south  to
seek  support  from  the  Chickasaws,  Choctaws,  and
Creeks,  Harrison  took  advantage  of  his  absence  and
attacked  Prophetstown.  The  governor’s  1,000  troops

