236

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

Tenskwatawa, “The Prophet,” 1830

Tenskwatawa added a spiritual dimension
to Native American resistance by urging
a holy war against the invading whites
and calling for a return to sacred ances-
tral ways. His dress reﬂects his teachings:
note the animal-skin shirt and the heavily
ornamented ears. However, some of
Tenskwatawa’s religious rituals reﬂected
the inﬂuence of French Jesuits; he urged
his followers to ﬁnger a sacred string
of beads (such as those in his left hand)
that were similar to the Catholic rosary,
thereby “shaking hands with the Prophet.”
Whatever its origins, Tenskwatawa’s
message transcended the cultural
differences among Indian peoples
and helped his brother Tecumseh
create a formidable political and mili-
tary alliance. Smithsonian American Art
Museum, Washington, D.C./Art Resource.

and militiamen traded heavy casualties with the con-
federacy’s  warriors  at  the  Battle  of  Tippecanoe  and
then destroyed the holy village.

With Britain assisting Indians in the western terri-
tories  and  seizing  American  ships  in  the  Atlantic,
Henry Clay of Kentucky, the new Speaker of the House
of  Representatives,  and  John  C.  Calhoun,  a  rising
young  congressman  from  South  Carolina,  pushed
Madison  toward  war.  Like  other  Republican  “war
hawks” from the West and South, they wanted to seize
territory in British Canada and Spanish Florida. With
national  elections  approaching,  Madison  issued  an
ultimatum to Britain. When Britain failed to respond
quickly, the president asked Congress for a declaration
of war. In June 1812, a sharply divided Senate voted 19
to 13 for war, and the House of Representatives con-
curred, 79 to 49.

The  causes  of  the  War  of  1812  have  been  much
debated.  Officially,  the  United  States  went  to  war
because Britain had violated its commercial rights as a

neutral  nation.  But  the  Federalists  in  Congress  who
represented  the  New  England  and  Middle  Atlantic
merchants voted against the war; and in the election of
1812, those regions cast their 89 electoral votes for the
Federalist  presidential  candidate,  De  Witt  Clinton  of
New York. Madison amassed most of his 128 electoral
votes  in  the  South  and  West,  where  voters  and  con-
gressmen strongly supported the war. Many historians
therefore argue that the conflict was actually “a western
war with eastern labels” (American Voices, p. 238).

The War of 1812
The  War  of  1812  was  a  near  disaster  for  the  United
States. An invasion of British Canada in 1812 quickly
ended in a retreat to Detroit. Nonetheless, the United
States  stayed  on  the  offensive  in  the  West.  In  1813,
American raiders burned the Canadian capital of York
(present-day  Toronto),  Commodore  Oliver  Hazard
Perry defeated a small British flotilla on Lake Erie, and

