CHAPTER 7

  Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820

237

Counting Scalps

Effective propaganda usually contains a grain of truth, in this case the Indian warriors’ practice of
scalping their wartime victims. Entitled “A scene on the frontiers as practiced by the humane British
and their worthy allies!”, this cartoon by Philadelphia artist William Charles accuses the British of
paying Indians to kill — and then mutilate — American soldiers. “Bring me the scalps, and the King
our master will reward you,” says the British ofﬁcer in the cartoon. The verse at the bottom urges
“Columbia’s Sons” to press forward their attacks; otherwise, “The Savage Indian with his Scalping
knife, / Or Tomahawk may seek to take your life.” Library of Congress.

General  William  Henry  Harrison  overcame  a  British
and Indian force at the Battle of the Thames, taking the
life of Tecumseh, now a British general.

In  the  East,  political  divisions  prevented  a  wider
war.  New  England  Federalists  opposed  the  war  and
prohibited their states’ militias from attacking Canada.
Boston merchants and banks refused to lend money to
the  federal  government,  making  the  war  difficult  to
finance. In Congress, Daniel Webster, a dynamic young
led  Federalists
politician  from  New  Hampshire,
opposed to higher tariffs and national conscription of
state militiamen.

Gradually, the tide of battle turned in Britain’s favor.
When  the  war  began,  American  privateers  had  cap-
tured  scores  of  British  merchant  vessels,  but  by  1813
British warships were disrupting American commerce
and  threatening  seaports  along  the  Atlantic  coast.
In  1814,  a  British  fleet  sailed  up  the  Chesapeake
Bay, and troops stormed ashore to attack Washington
City. Retaliating for the destruction of York, the invad-
ers  burned  the  U.S.  Capitol  and  government  build-
ings. After two years of fighting, the United States was

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What do you think is the
most persuasive explana-
tion for the United States’s
decision to declare war on
Great Britain in 1812?

stalemated  along  the  Canadian
frontier  and  on  the  defensive  in
the  Atlantic,  and  its  new  capital
city  lay  in  ruins.  The  only  U.S.
victories  came  in  the  Southwest.
There,  a  rugged  slave-owning
planter  named  Andrew  Jackson
and a force of Tennessee militiamen defeated British-
and Spanish-supported Creek Indians in the Battle of
Horseshoe Bend (1814) and forced the Indians to cede
23 million acres of land (Map 7.5).

Federalists  Oppose  the  War  American  military
setbacks  increased  opposition  to  the  war  in  New
England. In 1814, Massachusetts Federalists called for
a convention “to lay the foundation for a radical reform
in  the  National  Compact.”  When  New  England
Federalists  met  in  Hartford,  Connecticut,  some  dele-
gates  proposed  secession,  but  most  wanted  to  revise
the Constitution. To end Virginia’s domination of the
presidency, the Hartford Convention proposed a con-
stitutional  amendment  limiting  the  office  to  a  single

