A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Factional Politics and

the War of 1812

In the quarter-century following the ratiﬁcation of the U.S. Constitution, Ameri-
can leaders had to deal with the wars of the French Revolution and Napoleon.
These European conﬂicts posed two dangers to the United States. First, the naval
blockades imposed by the British and the French hurt American commerce and
prompted calls for a military response. Second, European ideological and politi-
cal struggles intensiﬁed party conﬂicts in the United States. On three occasions,
the American republic faced danger from the combination of an external mili-
tary threat and internal political turmoil. In 1798, the Federalist administration
of John Adams almost went to war with France to help American merchants and
to  undermine  the  Republican  Party.  In  1807,  Thomas  Jefferson’s  embargo  on
American commerce shocked Federalists and sharply increased political tensions.
And, as the following selections show, the political divisions during the War of
1812 threatened the very existence of the American republic.

George Washington
Farewell Address, 1796

Washington’s support for Alexander Hamilton’s economic
policies promoted political factionalism. Ignoring his own
role  in  creating  that  political  divide,  Washington  con-
demned  factionalism  and,  as  his  presidency  proceeded,
tried to stand above party conﬂicts. In his farewell address,
Washington warned Americans to stand united and avoid
the “Spirit of Party.”

A solicitude for your welfare [prompts me] . . . to
offer . . . the disinterested warnings of a parting friend,
who can possibly have no personal motive to bias his
counsels. . . .

The Unity of Government which constitutes you
one people . . . is a main Pillar in the Edifice of your real
independence . . . your tranquility at home; your peace
abroad. . . . But it is easy to foresee, that, from different
causes, and from different quarters, much pains will be
taken, many artifices employed, to weaken in your minds
the conviction of this truth. . . .

I have already intimated to you the danger of parties
in the State, with particular reference to founding them
on geographical discriminations. Let me now take a more
comprehensive view, and warn you, in the most solemn
manner, against the baneful effects of the Spirit of Party,
generally.

This spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our
nature, having its root in the strongest passions of the
human mind. It exists under different shapes, in all gov-
ernments, more or less stifled, controlled or repressed;
but in those of the popular form, it is seen in its greatest
rankness, and is truly their worst enemy.

238

The alternate dominion of one faction over another,
sharpened by the spirit of revenge . . . , is itself a frightful
despotism; but this leads at length to a more formal and
permanent despotism.

Source: James D. Richardson, ed., A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the
Presidents, 1789–1896 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1896),
1: 213–215.

Josiah Quincy et al.
Federalists Protest “Mr. Madison’s War”

The United States — and its two political parties —  divided
sharply  over  the  War  of  1812.  As  Congress  debated  the
issue of going to war against Great Britain, Josiah Quincy
and  other  antiwar  Federalist  congressmen  published  a
manifesto  that  questioned  the  justiﬁcations  for  the  war
offered  by  President  Madison  and  the  military  strategy
proposed by Republican war hawks.

How will war upon the land [an invasion of British
Canada] protect commerce upon the ocean? What balm
has Canada for wounded honor? How are our mariners
benefited by a war which exposes those who are free,
without promising release to those who are impressed?
But it is said that war is demanded by honor. Is
national honor a principle which thirsts after vengeance,
and is appeased only by blood? . . . If honor demands a
war with England, what opiate lulls that honor to sleep
over the wrongs done us by France? On land, robberies,
seizures, imprisonments, by French authority; at sea, pil-
lage, sinkings, burnings, under French orders. These are
notorious. Are they unfelt because they are French? . . .

