There is . . . a headlong rushing into difficulties, with
little calculation about the means, and little concern about
the consequences. With a navy comparatively [small], we
are about to enter into the lists against the greatest marine
[power] on the globe. With a commerce unprotected and
spread over every ocean, we propose to make a profit by
privateering, and for this endanger the wealth of which
we are honest proprietors. An invasion is threatened of
the [British colonies in Canada, but Britain] . . . without
putting a new ship into commission, or taking another
soldier into pay, can spread alarm or desolation along
the extensive range of our seaboard. . . .

What are the United States to gain by this war? Will
the gratification of some privateersmen compensate the
nation for that sweep of our legitimate commerce by the
extended marine of our enemy which this desperate act
invites? Will Canada compensate the Middle states for
[the loss of] New York; or the Western states for [the
loss of] New Orleans?

Let us not be deceived. A war of invasion may invite a
retort of invasion. When we visit the peaceable, and as to
us innocent, colonies of Great Britain with the horrors of
war, can we be assured that our own coast will not be vis-
ited with like horrors?

Source: Annals of Congress, 12th Cong., 1st sess., vol. 2, cols. 2219–2221.

Hezekiah Niles
A Republican Defends the War

In  1814,  what  the  Federalists  feared  had  come  to  pass:
British ships blockaded American ports, and British troops
invaded  American  territory.  In  January  1815,  Republican
editor  Hezekiah  Niles  used  the  pages  of  his  inﬂuential
Baltimore  newspaper,  Niles’  Weekly  Register,  to  explain
current Republican policies and blame the Federalists for
American reverses.

It is universally known that the causes for which we
declared war are no obstruction to peace. The practice
of blockade and impressment having ceased by the gen-
eral pacification of Europe, our government is content
to leave the principle as it was. . . .

We have no further business in hostility, than such
as is purely defensive; while that of Great Britain is to
humble or subdue us. The war, on our part, has become
a contest for life, liberty and property — on the part of
our enemy, of revenge or ambition. . . .

What then are we to do? Are we to encourage him
by divisions among ourselves — to hold out the hope of a

separation of the states and a civil war — to refuse to bring
forth the resources of the country against him? . . . I did
think that in a defensive war — a struggle for all that is
valuable — that all parties would have united. But it is
not so — every measure calculated to replenish the trea-
sury or raise men is opposed [by Federalists] as though it
were determined to strike the “star spangled banner” and
exalt the bloody cross. Look at the votes and proceedings
of congress — and mark the late spirit [to secede from the
Union] . . . that existed in Massachusetts, and see with
what unity of action every thing has been done [by New
England Federalists] to harass and embarrass the govern-
ment. Our loans have failed; and our soldiers have wanted
their pay, because those [New England merchants] who
had the greater part of the monied capital covenanted
with each other to refuse its aid to the country. They had a
right, legally, to do this; and perhaps, also, by all the arti-
fices of trade or power that money gave them, to oppress
others not of their “stamp” and depress the national
credit — but history will shock posterity by detailing the
length to which they went to bankrupt the republic. . . .
To conclude — why does the war continue? It is not
the fault of the government — we demand no extravagant
thing. I answer the question, and say — it lasts because
Great Britain depends on the exertions of her “party” in this
country to destroy our resources, and compel “uncondi-
tional submission.”

Thus the war began, and is continued, by our

divisions.

Source: Niles’ Weekly Register, January 28, 1815.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  According to Washington, what is the ultimate cause

of political factionalism? Why does Washington believe
that factionalism is most dangerous in “popular” — that
is, republican — governments?

2.  Compare and contrast the Quincy and Niles documents.
What speciﬁc dangers did Josiah Quincy and the Feder-
alists foresee with regard to Republican war policies?
According to Hezekiah Niles, what were the war goals
of the Republican administration?

3.  Read the section on the War of 1812 on pages 236–

241, and then discuss the accuracy of the Federalists’
predictions.

4.  How had Republican war goals changed since the start
of the war? Niles charged the Federalists and their sup-
porters with impeding the American war effort. What
were his speciﬁc charges? Did they have any merit?
How might the Federalists have defended their stance
with respect to the war?

239

