240

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

Lake Superior

Ft. Mackinac

(cid:9)

C A N A D A

Quebec

LawrenceR.

t.
S

Montreal

MAINE
(part of Mass.)

n
a
g
i
h
c
i
M

e
k
a
L

MICHIGAN
TERRITORY

Chrysler’s Farm
Nov. 11, 1813

(cid:8)

2. Americans burn
York (Toronto),
April 27, 1813

LakeHuron

4. Harrison defeats British,
Battle of the Thames,
Oct. 5, 1813

Lake
Ontario

(cid:8)

Dearborn

Lundy’s Lane
July 25, 1814

(cid:8)

NEW
YORK

(cid:8)

LakeErie
Perry

(cid:8)

Erie

PENNSYLVANIA

VT. N.H.

(cid:8)

6. British invasion stopped at Plattsburgh
on Lake Champlain, Sept. 11, 1814

MASS.

CONN.

Boston

R.I.

New York

N.J.
7. British siege of Baltimore,
Sept. 13–14, 1814

Philadelphia

3. Perry defeats British,
Put-In-Bay, Sept. 10, 1813

OHIO

Godly Wood
Sept. 12, 1814
(cid:8)
(cid:9)
Ft. McHenry

Baltimore

(cid:8)
Washington, D.C.

DEL.

1814

1. Hull’s invasion of Canada fails,
then he loses Detroit, Aug. 16, 1812

(cid:8)
(cid:9)

Ft. Detroit

(cid:9)

Fort
 Dearborn

Tippecanoe
Nov. 7, 1811

(cid:8)

l
l
u
H

on
is
r
r
a
H

ILLINOIS
TERRITORY

INDIANA
TERRITORY

St. Louis

OhioR.

KENTUCKY

TENNESSEE

Y
R
O
T
I
R
R
E
T

D
E
Z
I
N
A
G
R
O
N
U

R.
pi

Mississip

Jackson

MISSISSIPPI
TERRITORY

son

k
c
a
J

8. Jackson defeats Creek Indians,
Horseshoe Bend, March 27, 1814

GEORGIA

(cid:8)

9. Jackson invades Spanish Florida
to attack the British at Pensacola,
Nov. 7, 1814

Jackson

(cid:8)

Pensacola

1814

Gulf of Mexico

LOUISIANA

New Orleans

(cid:8)

10. Jackson defeats British
at New Orleans, Jan. 8, 1815

MAP 7.5
The War of 1812

SPANISH
FLO
RID
A

5. British burn
Washington, D.C.,
Aug. 24–28, 1814

VIRGINIA

NORTH
CAROLINA

SOUTH
CAROLINA

MD.
Chesapeake
Bay

A T L A N T I C
O C E A N

N

W

E

S

Charleston

Savannah

0

0

150

300 miles

150

300 kilometers

U.S. states in 1812

U.S. territories in 1812

American movements

British movements

British blockade

American victories

British victories

Forts

(cid:8)

(cid:8)
(cid:9)

Unlike the War of Independence, the War of 1812 had few large-scale military campaigns. In 1812
and 1813, most of the ﬁghting took place along the Canadian border, as small American military
forces attacked British targets with mixed success (nos. 1–4). The British took the offensive in 1814,
launching a successful raid on Washington, but their attack on Baltimore failed, and they suffered
heavy losses when they invaded the United States along Lake Champlain (nos. 5–7). Near the Gulf
of Mexico, American forces moved from one success to another: General Andrew Jackson defeated
the pro-British Creek Indians at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend, won a victory in Pensacola, and, in
the single major battle of the war, routed an invading British army at New Orleans (nos. 8–10).

