CHAPTER 7

  Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820

241

four-year term and rotating it among citizens from dif-
ferent  states.  The  convention  also  suggested  amend-
ments restricting commercial embargoes to sixty days
and  requiring  a  two-thirds  majority  in  Congress  to
declare war, prohibit trade, or admit a new state to the
Union.

As  a  minority  party,  the  Federalists  could  prevail
only  if  the  war  continued  to  go  badly — a  very  real
prospect.  The  war  had  cost  $88  million,  raising  the
national  debt  to  $127  million.  And  now,  as  Albert
Gallatin warned Henry Clay in May 1814, Britain’s tri-
umph  over  Napoleon  in  Europe  meant  that  a  “well
organized  and  large  army  is  [now  ready] . . . to  act
immediately against us.” When an attack from Canada
came  in  the  late  summer  of  1814,  only  an  American
naval victory on Lake Champlain stopped the British
from marching down the Hudson River Valley. A few
months  later,  thousands  of  seasoned  British  troops
landed  outside  New  Orleans,  threatening  American
control of the Mississippi River. With the nation politi-
cally divided and under attack from north and south,
Gallatin feared that “the war might prove vitally fatal to
the United States.”

Peace Overtures and a Final Victory  Fortunately
for  the  young  American  republic,  by  1815  Britain
wanted  peace.  The  twenty-year  war  with  France  had
sapped its wealth and energy, so it began negotiations
with  the  United  States  in  Ghent,  Belgium.  At  first,
the American commissioners — John Quincy Adams,
Gallatin,  and  Clay — demanded  territory  in  Canada
and Florida, while British diplomats sought an Indian
buffer  state  between  the  United  States  and  Canada.
Both sides quickly realized that these objectives were
not worth the cost of prolonged warfare. The Treaty of
Ghent,  signed  on  Christmas  Eve  1814,  retained  the
prewar borders of the United States.

That result hardly justified three years of war, but
before news of the treaty reached the United States, a
final  military  victory  lifted  Americans’  morale.  On
January 8, 1815, General Jackson’s troops crushed the
British  forces  attacking  New  Orleans.  Fighting  from
carefully  constructed  breastworks,  the  Americans
rained “grapeshot and cannister bombs” on the massed
British  formations.  The  British  lost  700  men,  and
2,000  more  were  wounded  or  taken  prisoner;  just  13
Americans died, and only 58 suffered wounds. A news-
Incredible
paper  headline  proclaimed:  “Almost
Victory!! Glorious News.” The victory made Jackson a
national  hero,  redeemed  the  nation’s  battered  pride,
and undercut the Hartford Convention’s demands for
constitutional revision.

The Federalist Legacy
The War of 1812 ushered in a new phase of the Repub-
lican political revolution. Before the conflict, Federalists
had strongly supported Alexander Hamilton’s program
of  national  mercantilism — a  funded  debt,  a  central
bank, and tariffs — while Jeffersonian Republicans had
opposed  it.  After  the  war,  the  Republicans  split  into
two camps. Led by Henry Clay, National Republicans
pursued Federalist-like policies. In 1816, Clay pushed
legislation through Congress creating the Second Bank
of the United States and persuaded President Madison
to sign it. In 1817, Clay won passage of the Bonus Bill,
which  created  a  national  fund  for  roads  and  other
internal  improvements.  Madison  vetoed  it.  Reaffirm-
ing  traditional  Jeffersonian  Republican  principles,  he
argued that the national government lacked the consti-
tutional authority to fund internal improvements.

Meanwhile, the Federalist Party crumbled. As one
supporter  explained,  the  National  Republicans  in  the
eastern states had “destroyed the Federalist party by the
adoption  of  its  principles”  while  the  favorable  farm
policies  of  Jeffersonians  maintained  the  Republican
Party’s dominance in the South and West. “No Federal
character can run with success,” Gouverneur Morris of
New York lamented, and the election of 1818 proved
him right: Republicans outnumbered Federalists 37 to
7 in the Senate and 156 to 27 in the House. Westward
expansion and the success of Jefferson’s Revolution of
1800 had shattered the First Party System.

Marshall’s  Federalist  Law  However,  Federalist
policies lived on thanks to John Marshall’s long tenure
on  the  Supreme  Court.  Appointed  chief  justice  by
President John Adams in January 1801, Marshall had a
personality and intellect that allowed him to dominate
the  Court  until  1822  and  strongly  influence  its  deci-
sions until his death in 1835.

Three  principles  informed  Marshall’s  jurispru-
dence:  judicial  authority,  the  supremacy  of  national
laws,  and  traditional  property  rights  (Table  7.1).
Marshall  claimed  the  right  of  judicial  review  for  the
Supreme Court in Marbury v. Madison (1803), and the
Court  frequently  used  that  power  to  overturn  state
laws that, in its judgment, violated the Constitution.

Asserting  National  Supremacy  The  important
case  of  McCulloch  v.  Maryland  (1819)  involved  one
such law. When Congress created the Second Bank of
the United States in 1816, it allowed the bank to set up
state  branches  that  competed  with  state-chartered
banks. In response, the Maryland legislature imposed a

