242

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

TABLE 7.1

Major Decisions of the Marshall Court

Judicial Authority

Property Rights

Date

1803

1810

1819

Case

Significance of Decision

Marbury v. Madison

Asserts principle of judicial review

Fletcher v. Peck

Protects property rights through broad
reading of Constitution’s contract clause

Dartmouth College v.
Woodward

Safeguards property rights, especially of
chartered corporations

Supremacy of National Law 1819

McCulloch v. Maryland

1824

Gibbons v. Ogden

Interprets Constitution to give broad
powers to national government

Gives national government jurisdiction
over interstate commerce

tax  on  notes  issued  by  the  Baltimore  branch  of  the
Second Bank. The Second Bank refused to pay, claim-
ing that the tax infringed on national powers and was
therefore  unconstitutional.  The  state’s  lawyers  then
invoked Jefferson’s argument: that Congress lacked the
constitutional  authority  to  charter  a  national  bank.
Even  if  a  national  bank  was  legitimate,  the  lawyers
argued,  Maryland  could  tax  its  activities  within  the
state.

Marshall  and  the  nationalist-minded  Republicans
on  the  Court  firmly  rejected  both  arguments.  The
Second Bank was constitutional, said the chief justice,
because  it  was  “necessary  and
proper,”  given  the  national  gov-
ernment’s  control  over  currency
and credit, and Maryland did not
have the power to tax it.

The  Marshall  Court  again
asserted
the  dominance  of
national  over  state  statutes  in
Gibbons v. Ogden (1824). The decision struck down a
New York law granting a monopoly to Aaron Ogden
for  steamboat  passenger  service  across  the  Hudson
River  to  New  Jersey.  Asserting  that  the  Constitution
gave the federal government authority over interstate
commerce,  the  chief  justice  sided  with  Thomas
Gibbons, who held a federal license to run steamboats
between the two states.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Why do historians think
the decisions of the Mar-
shall Court constitute a
Federalist legacy?

Upholding  Vested  Property  Rights  Finally,
Marshall  used  the  Constitution  to  uphold  Federalist
notions of property rights. During the 1790s, Jefferson
Republicans  had  celebrated  “the  will  of  the  people,”
prompting  Federalists  to  worry  that  popular  sover-
eignty  would  result  in  a  “tyranny  of  the  majority.”  If

state  legislatures  enacted  statutes  infringing  on  the
property  rights  of  wealthy  citizens,  Federalist  judges
vowed to void them.

Marshall was no exception. Determined to protect
individual  property  rights,  he  invoked  the  contract
clause of the Constitution to do it. The contract clause
(in Article I, Section 10) prohibits the states from pass-
ing  any  law  “impairing  the  obligation  of  contracts.”
Economic conservatives at the Philadelphia convention
had  inserted  the  clause  to  prevent  “stay”  laws,  which
kept  creditors  from  seizing  the  lands  and  goods  of
delinquent debtors. In Fletcher v. Peck (1810), Marshall
greatly expanded its scope. The Georgia legislature had
granted a huge tract of land to the Yazoo Land Com-
pany. When a new legislature cancelled the grant, alleg-
ing fraud and bribery, speculators who had purchased
Yazoo lands appealed to the Supreme Court to uphold
their titles. Marshall did so by ruling that the legislative
grant  was  a  contract  that  could  not  be  revoked.  His
decision was controversial and far-reaching. It limited
state power; bolstered vested property rights; and, by
protecting out-of-state investors, promoted the devel-
opment of a national capitalist economy.

The Court extended its defense of vested property
rights  in  Dartmouth  College  v.  Woodward  (1819).
Dartmouth College was a private institution created by
a royal charter issued by King George III. In 1816, New
Hampshire’s  Republican  legislature  enacted  a  statute
converting  the  school  into  a  public  university.  The
Dartmouth trustees opposed the legislation and hired
Daniel Webster to plead their case. A renowned consti-
tutional lawyer and a leading Federalist, Webster cited
the Court’s decision in Fletcher v. Peck and argued that
the  royal  charter  was  an  unalterable  contract.  The
Marshall Court agreed and upheld Dartmouth’s claims.

