CHAPTER 7

  Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820

243

John Marshall, by Chester Harding,
c. 1830

Even at the age of seventy-ﬁve, John
Marshall (1755–1835) had a commanding
personal presence. After he became chief
justice of the U.S. Supreme Court in 1801,
Marshall elevated the Court from a minor
department of the national government
to a major institution in American legal
and political life. His decisions on judicial
review, contract rights, the regulation of
commerce, and national banking perma-
nently shaped the character of American
constitutional law. © Boston Athenaeum,
USA/The Bridgeman Art Library.

The  Diplomacy  of  John  Quincy  Adams  Even  as
John Marshall incorporated important Federalist prin-
ciples into the American legal system, voting citizens
and  political  leaders  embraced  the  outlook  of  the
Republican Party. The political career of John Quincy
Adams was a case in point. Although he was the son of
Federalist president John Adams, John Quincy Adams
had  joined  the  Republican  Party  before  the  War  of
1812.  He  came  to  national  attention  for  his  role  in
negotiating the Treaty of Ghent, which ended the war.
Adams then served brilliantly as secretary of state
for  two  terms  under  James  Monroe  (1817–1825).
Ignoring Republican antagonism toward Great Britain,

in  1817  Adams  negotiated  the  Rush-Bagot  Treaty,
which  limited  American  and  British  naval  forces  on
the Great Lakes. In 1818, he concluded another agree-
ment with Britain setting the forty-ninth parallel as the
border between Canada and the lands of the Louisiana
Purchase.  Then,  in  the  Adams-Onís  Treaty  of  1819,
Adams persuaded Spain to cede the Florida territory to
the United States (Map 7.6). In return, the American
government accepted Spain’s claim to Texas and agreed
to a compromise on the western boundary for the state
of Louisiana, which had entered the Union in 1812.

Finally,  Adams  persuaded  President  Monroe  to
declare  American  national  policy  with  respect  to  the

