244

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

B R I T I S H   C A N A D A

N.
MAINE

N

W

E

S

OREGON

COUNTRY

 LOUISIANA

 PURCHASE, 1803

  U N I T E D   S TAT E S ,   1 7 8 3

 NEW SPAIN
(Mexico after 1821)

A
L
T
A
C
A
L
I
F
O
R
NIA

NUEVO
MEXICO

P A C I F I C
O C E A N

SONORA
Y
SINALOA

B
A
J
A
C
A
L
I
F
O
R
N
I
A

NUEVA
VIZCAYA  COAHUILA

TEJAS

NUEVO
SANTANDER

0

0

FLORIDA
(Ceded to U.S.
 by Spain, 1819)

500 miles

Gulf of Mexico
250

250

500 kilometers

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

Treaty Lines
U.S. and Britain, 1818
Adams-Onís Treaty, 1819

U.S. and British Territory

Disputed territory, Maine
Joint occupation, Oregon
1818–1846

Cessions
Ceded by U.S.
to Spain, 1818
Ceded by Britain
to U.S., 1819

Land in Florida,
Occupied by U.S.
1810
1813
1819

MAP 7.6
Defining the National Boundaries, 1800–1820

After the War of 1812, American diplomats negotiated treaties with Great Britain and Spain that
deﬁned the boundaries of the Louisiana Purchase, with British Canada to the north and New Spain
(which in 1821 became the independent nation of Mexico) to the south and west. These treaties
eliminated the threat of border wars with neighboring states for a generation, giving the United
States a much-needed period of peace and security.

Western  Hemisphere.  At  Adams’s  behest,  Monroe
warned Spain and other European powers to keep their
hands  off  the  newly  independent  republics  in  Latin
America. The American continents were not “subject
for  further  colonization,”  the  president  declared  in
1823 — a policy that thirty years later became known
as  the  Monroe  Doctrine.  In  return,  Monroe  pledged
that the United States would not “interfere in the inter-
nal  concerns”  of  European  nations.  Thanks  to  John
Quincy  Adams,  the  United  States  had  successfully
asserted  its  diplomatic  leadership  in  the  Western
Hemisphere  and  won  international  acceptance  of  its
northern and western boundaries.

The  appearance  of  political  consensus  after  two
decades of bitter party conflict prompted observers to
dub James Monroe’s presidency (1817–1825) the “Era
of Good Feeling.” This harmony was real but transitory.
The  Republican  Party  was  now  split  between  the
National  faction,  led  by  Clay  and  Adams,  and  the
Jeffersonian  faction,  soon  to  be  led  by  Martin  Van

Buren  and  Andrew  Jackson. The  two  groups  differed
sharply over federal support for roads and canals and
many other issues. As the aging Jefferson himself com-
plained,  “You  see  so  many  of  these  new  [National]
republicans maintaining in Congress the rankest doc-
trines  of  the  old  federalists.”  This  division  in  the
Republican  Party  would  soon  produce  the  Second
Party  System,  in  which  national-minded  Whigs  and
state-focused  Democrats  would  confront  each  other.
By the early 1820s, one cycle of American politics and
economic debate had ended, and another was about to
begin.

SUMMARY
In  this  chapter,  we  traced  three  interrelated  themes:
public policy, westward expansion, and party politics.
We  began  by  examining  the  contrasting  public  poli-
cies  advocated  by  Alexander  Hamilton  and  Thomas

