CHAPTER 7

  CHAPTER REVIEW

245

Jefferson.  A  Federalist,  Hamilton  supported  a  strong
national government and created a fiscal infrastructure
(the national debt, tariffs, and a national bank) to spur
trade and manufacturing. By contrast, Jefferson wanted
to preserve the authority of state governments, and he
envisioned  an  America  enriched  by  farming  rather
than industry.

Jefferson  and  the  Republicans  promoted  a  west-
ward  movement  that  transformed  the  agricultural
economy and sparked new wars with Indian peoples.
Expansion westward also shaped American diplomatic
and military policy, leading to the Louisiana Purchase,

the  War  of  1812,  and  the  treaties  negotiated  by  John
Quincy Adams.

Finally, there was the unexpected rise of the First
Party System. As Hamilton’s policies split the political
elite,  the  French  Revolution  divided  Americans  into
hostile ideological groups. The result was two decades
of  bitter  conflict  and  controversial  measures:  the
Federalists’  Sedition  Act,  the  Republicans’  Embargo
Act, and Madison’s decision to go to war with Britain.
Although the Federalist Party faded away, it left as its
enduring legacy Hamilton’s financial innovations and
John Marshall’s constitutional jurisprudence.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

Judiciary Act of 1789 (p. 216)
Bill of Rights (p. 216)
Report on the Public Credit

(p. 216)

Bank of the United States (p. 218)
Report on Manufactures (p. 218)
Proclamation of Neutrality

(p. 219)

French Revolution (p. 219)
Jacobins (p. 219)
Whiskey Rebellion (p. 219)
Jay’s Treaty (p. 222)
Haitian Revolution (p. 222)
XYZ Affair (p. 223)

Naturalization, Alien, and
Sedition Acts (p. 224)
Virginia and Kentucky
Resolutions (p. 225)

Treaty of Greenville (p. 226)
Marbury v. Madison (1803)

(p. 231)

Louisiana Purchase (p. 233)
Embargo Act of 1807 (p. 234)
Battle of Tippecanoe (p. 236)
Treaty of Ghent (p. 241)
McCulloch v. Maryland (1819)

(p. 241)

Adams-Onís Treaty (p. 243)
Monroe Doctrine (p. 244)

Key People

Alexander Hamilton (p. 216)
Thomas Jefferson (p. 218)
John Adams (p. 223)
Little Turtle (p. 226)
John Marshall (p. 231)
Tecumseh (p. 235)
Henry Clay (p. 241)
John Quincy Adams (p. 243)

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  Why did Alexander Hamilton, as Washington’s first
secretary of the treasury, advocate the creation of a
permanent  national  debt  and  a  national  bank?
What  fears  did  his  economic  plans  arouse  in  his
Republican opponents?

2.  What were the principal effects of the French and
Haitian  Revolutions  in  the  United  States?  How
did they influence the development of the Ameri-
can  economy,  American  politics,  and  westward
development?

