246

PART 3

  CHAPTER REVIEW

3.  What  forces — ideological,  political,  and  eco-
nomic — led the  United  States  to  gain dominance
over eastern North America in these years?

4.  Explain the rise and fall of the First Party System.
How did the policies implemented by Republican
presidents  between  1801  and  1825  differ  from
those implemented during the 1790s? Why did the
Federalists  fall  out  of  favor?  What  legacy  did  the
Federalists leave?

5.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Look  at  the
events listed under “Work, Exchange, and Technol-
ogy” and “Politics and Power” for the period 1800–
1820 on the thematic timeline on page 149. What
was  the  relationship  in  these  years  between  the
activism of the national government and develop-
ments in the American economy?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  In  Chapter  6,
thirteen former British colonies cooperated in war
and established new republican institutions of self-
government.  After  1789,  unforeseen  divisions
developed  in  American  politics.  Why  did  Ham-
iltonians  and  Jeffersonians  disagree  so  sharply
on key questions of national policy? Which of the
factions in the First Party System — Federalists or
Republicans — best embodied the principles of the
Revolution?  How  did  westward  expansion  and

international  relations  force  the  United  States  to
modify its Revolutionary republican ideals?

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  Return  to  the  Currier  &
Ives  print  depicting  the  bombardment  of  Tripoli
on  page  232.  What  message  does  it  convey  about
America’s  position  in  the  world?  How  well  does
that message square with the actual outcome of the
First  Barbary  War?  What  does  this  suggest  about
the artist’s purpose?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Gregory Dowd, A Spirited Resistance (1993). A
penetrating account of Indian resistance to American
expansion.

Joanne B. Freeman, Affairs of Honor (2002). A cultural
analysis of the politics of the 1790s.

Alan Taylor, The Civil War of 1812 (2010). Presents
the contest for Canada as a multiethnic civil war.

Ashli White, Encountering Revolution (2012). Con-
siders the impact of the Haitian Revolution on the
United States.

Jon Kukla, A Wilderness So Immense (2004). A
sweeping account of the contexts for the Louisiana
Purchase.

The War of 1812 (PBS video, 2011) and its accompa-
nying Web site (pbs.org/wned/war-of-1812/home/)
offer reenactments, animations, interpretive essays,
and historical site analyses.

