Creating a Republican Culture
1790–1820

By  the  1820s,  America’s  white  citi-

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
In  eighteenth-century  Europe,  the
leading  principles  were  aristocracy,
patriarchy,  mercantilism,  arranged
marriages,
legal  privilege,  and
established  churches.  What  prin-
ciples  would  replace  those  societal
rules  in  America’s  new  republican
society?

zenry had embraced the republican
political  order.  Their  nation  stood
forth  as  a  “promised  land  of  civil  liberty,
and  of  institutions  designed  to  liberate
and  exalt  the  human  race,”  declared  a
Kentucky  judge.  White  Americans  were
indeed fortunate. They lived under a repre-
sentative  republican  government,  free
from arbitrary taxation and from domina-
tion by an established church. The timing of the deaths of aging political leaders John
Adams and Thomas Jefferson seemed to many Americans to conﬁrm that God looked
with favor on their experiment in self-government. What other than divine intervention
could explain their nearly simultaneous deaths on July 4, 1826, the ﬁftieth anniversary
of the Declaration of Independence?

Inspired by their political freedom, many citizens sought to extend republican principles
throughout their society. But what were those principles? For entrepreneurial-minded
merchants, farmers, and political leaders, republicanism meant a dynamic market econ-
omy based on the private ownership of property and capital. However, they welcomed
legislative policies that assisted private business and, they claimed, enhanced the “com-
mon wealth” of the society. Other Americans in the northern states championed demo-
cratic republican cultural values, such as equality in the family and in social relationships.
In the southern states, sharply divided by class and race, politicians and pamphleteers
endorsed  aristocratic  republicanism.  It  stressed  liberty  for  whites  rather  than  equality
for all.

Yet  another  vision  of  American  republicanism  emerged  from  the  Second  Great
Awakening, religious revivals that swept the nation between 1790 and 1850. As Alexis
de Tocqueville reported in Democracy in America (1835), the Second Great Awakening
gave “the Christian religion . . . a greater inﬂuence over the souls of men” than in any
other  country.  Moreover,  religious  enthusiasm — what  Methodist  bishop  McIlvaine
praised  as  “the  quickening  of  the  people  of  God  to  a  spirit  and  walk  becoming  the
gospel” — prompted social reform on many fronts. For those who embraced the Awak-
ening, the United States was both a great experiment in republican government and a
Christian civilization destined to redeem the world — a moral mission that would inform
American diplomacy in the centuries to come.

8

C H A P T E R

THE CAPITALIST
COMMONWEALTH

Banks, Manufacturing, and

Markets

Public Enterprise: The

Commonwealth System

TOWARD A
DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLICAN CULTURE

Opportunity and Equality — for

White Men

Toward Republican Families

Raising Republican Children

ARISTOCRATIC
REPUBLICANISM AND
SLAVERY

The Revolution and Slavery,

1776–1800

The North and South Grow

Apart

The Missouri Crisis, 1819–1821

PROTESTANT
CHRISTIANITY AS A
SOCIAL FORCE

A Republican Religious Order

The Second Great Awakening

Religion and Reform

Women’s New Religious Roles

248

