250

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

The Capitalist Commonwealth
What  did  republicanism  mean  for  economic  life?  In
early-nineteenth-century  America,  it  meant  private
property,  market  exchange,  individual  opportunity,
and activist governments. Throughout the nation, and
especially in the Northeast, republican state legislatures
embraced a “neomercantilist” system of government-
assisted economic development. And it worked. Begin-
ning  around  1800,  the  average  per  capita  income
of  Americans  increased  by  more  than  1  percent  a
year — more than 30 percent in a single generation.

Banks, Manufacturing, and Markets
America was “a Nation of Merchants,” a British visitor
reported from Philadelphia in 1798, “keen in the pur-
suit of wealth in all the various modes of acquiring it.”
Acquire it they did, making spectacular profits as the
wars  of  the  French  Revolution  and  Napoleon  (1793–
1815) crippled European firms. Merchants John Jacob
Astor and Robert Oliver became the nation’s first mil-
lionaires. After working for an Irish-owned linen firm
in Baltimore, Oliver struck out on his own, achieving
affluence  by  trading  West  Indian  sugar  and  coffee.
Astor,  who  migrated  from  Germany  to  New  York  in
1784, began by selling dry-goods in western New York
and became wealthy by carrying furs from the Pacific
Northwest  to  China  and  investing  in  New  York  City
real estate (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 252).

Banking  and  Credit  To  finance  their  ventures,
Oliver,  Astor,  and  other  merchants  needed  capital,
from  either  their  own  savings  or  loans.  Before  the
Revolution, farmers  relied  on  government-sponsored
land banks for loans, while merchants arranged part-
nerships  or  obtained  credit  from  British  suppliers.
Then, in 1781, Philadelphia merchants persuaded the
Confederation Congress to charter the Bank of North
America,  and  traders  in  Boston  and  New  York  soon
founded similar institutions that raised funds and lent
them out. “Our monied capital has so much increased
from the Introduction of Banks, & the Circulation of
the  Funds,”  Philadelphia  merchant  William  Bingham
boasted  in  1791,  “that  the  Necessity  of  Soliciting
Credits from England will no longer exist.”

That same  year, Federalists in Congress chartered
the Bank of the United States to issue notes and make
commercial  loans  (Chapter  7,  p.  218).  By  1805,  the
bank had branches in eight seaport cities, profits that
averaged  a  handsome  8  percent  annually,  and  clients

A Cloth Merchant, 1789

Originally a prosperous storekeeper in New Milford,
Connecticut, Elijah Boardman (1760–1832) eventually
became a U.S. senator. Like other American traders dur-
ing the 1780s, he imported huge quantities of cloth from
Britain. When the wars of the 1790s cut off trade, some
merchants ﬁnanced the domestic production of textiles.
Others, including Boardman, turned to land speculation.
In 1795, he joined the Connecticut Land Company and
bought huge tracts in Connecticut’s Western Reserve,
including the present towns of Medina, Palmyra, and
Boardman, Ohio. Ralph Earl painted this portrait in 1789.
© The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Image Source: Art Resource/NY.

with  easy  access  to  capital.  As  trader  Jesse  Atwater
noted, “the foundations of our [merchant] houses are
laid in bank paper.”

However,  Jeffersonians  attacked  the  bank  as  an
unconstitutional expansion of federal power. Moreover,
they  claimed  it  promoted  “a  consolidated,  energetic
government  supported  by  public  creditors,  specula-
tors,  and  other  insidious  men.”  When  the  bank’s
twenty-year  charter  expired  in  1811,  the  Jeffersonian
Republican–dominated Congress refused to renew it.

