CHAPTER 8

  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820

251

The China Trade

Following the Revolution, New England merchants traded actively with the major Asian manufacturing
centers of China and India. In this painting by George Chinnery (1774–1852), the American ﬂag ﬂies
prominently, alongside other national banners, in front of the warehouse district in Canton (modern
Guangzhou). There, merchants exchanged bundles of American furs for cargoes of Chinese tea, silks,
and porcelain plates, cups, and serving dishes. © Peabody Essex Museum, Salem, Massachusetts, USA/The
Bridgeman Art Library.

Merchants,  artisans,  and  farmers  quickly  persuaded
state  legislatures  to  charter  banks — in  Pennsylvania,
no fewer than 41. By 1816, when Congress (now run by
National Republicans) chartered a new national bank
(known as the Second Bank of the United States), there
were 246 state-chartered banks with tens of thousands
of stockholders and $68 million in banknotes in circu-
lation. These state banks were often shady operations
that  issued  notes  without  adequate  specie  reserves,
made loans to insiders, and lent generously to farmers
buying overpriced land.

Dubious banking policies helped bring on the Panic
of 1819 (just as they caused the financial crisis of 2008),
but  broader  forces  were  equally  important.  As  the
Napoleonic  Wars  ended  in  1815,  Americans  sharply
increased  their  consumption  of  English  woolen  and
cotton goods. However, in 1818, farmers and planters
faced an abrupt 30 percent drop in world agricultural

prices. The price of raw cotton in South Carolina fell
from 34 to 15 cents a pound, and as Britain closed the
West  Indies  to  American  trade,  wheat  prices  plum-
meted as well. As farmers’ income declined, they could
not pay debts owed to stores and banks, many of which
went  bankrupt.  “A  deep  shadow  has  passed  over  our
land,” lamented one New Yorker, as land prices dropped
by  50  percent.  The  panic  gave  Americans  their  first
taste of a business cycle, the periodic boom and bust
inherent to an unregulated market economy.

Rural Manufacturing  The Panic of 1819 devastated
artisans  and  farmers  who  sold  goods  in  regional  or
national markets. Before 1800, many artisans worked
part-time  and  bartered  their  handicrafts  locally.  A
French  traveler  in  Massachusetts  found  many  “men
who  are  both  cultivators  and  artisans,”  while  in  Lan-
caster, Pennsylvania, clockmaker John Hoff exchanged

