T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

The Entrepreneur and

the Community

Americans of the early republic believed that with hard work and virtue, even
the lowliest of white men might rise to economic and political respectability, if
not prominence. In the Revolutionary generation, Benjamin Franklin, born into
a large and impoverished Boston family, had become a successful businessman
and  an  international  celebrity.  Franklin’s  success  reﬂected  the  optimism  that
laboring  men  felt  when  contemplating  the  new  nation’s  seemingly  boundless
opportunity.

1.  Banner of the Society of Pewterers of the City of
New York, carried in the Federal Procession, July
23, 1788, celebrating the ratification of the U.S.
Constitution. The ribbon at top right reads “The
Federal Plan Most Solid & Secure/Americans Their
Freedom Will Endure/All Art Shall Flourish in
Columbia’s Land/And All her Sons Join as One
Social Band.”

Source: © Collection of the New York Historical Society, USA/The Bridgeman Art
Library.

2.  John Jacob Astor quoted in Elbert Hubbard, Little
Journeys to the Homes of Great Business Men,
1909. John Jacob Astor’s (1763–1848) story is a
parable of American entrepreneurial triumph.
Arriving in America in 1783 from Germany, Astor
worked in the fur industry treating pelts and,
with capital borrowed from his brother, started
up a musical instrument shop and fur business
in 1786. Over the next three decades, Astor’s
American Fur Company prospered by trading
furs in China, making Astor America’s ﬁrst mil-
lionaire. Apparently inﬂuenced by Benjamin

252

Franklin’s aphorism “Early to bed and early to rise,
makes a man healthy wealthy and wise,” Astor
wrote:

The man who makes it the habit of his life to go to bed at
nine o’clock, usually gets rich and is always reliable. Of
course, going to bed does not make him rich — I merely
mean that such a man will in all probability be up early
in the morning and do a big day’s work . . . good habits
in America make any man rich.

3.  Anonymous, “A Working Man’s Recollections of

America,” Knight’s Penny Magazine, 1846. A cabi-
netmaker penned this account after returning to
England following an unsuccessful stint seeking
success in New York.

I was a cabinet-maker by trade, and one of the many
who, between the years 1825–35, expatriated themselves
in countless thousands, drawn by the promise of fair
wages for faithful work, and driven by the scanty remu-
neration offered to unceasing toil at home. . . . On landing
in New York I made up my mind to lose none of the
advantages it uttered by want of diligence on my part.
During the first two years I took but one holiday. . . . In
summer we began work at six; at eight took half an hour
for breakfast, and then worked till twelve, when one an
hour for dinner; after which we kept on till six, seven,
or eight. . . . A relative who arrived from England held
out to me bright prospects of advantages to be realized
by the employment of a little capital, combined with a
removal to some inland town. I sold off nearly the whole
of our moveables . . . [and committed all my savings to
this enterprise. However,] our scheme . . . completely
failed, and I had no resources but my industry and
chest of tools to meet the impending difficulties.

4.  Diary entry by Philip Hone, March 29, 1848.

Philip Hone (1780–1851), a conservative Whig,
was a successful merchant and entrepreneur
and mayor of New York City from 1826 to 1827.

