Hone’s marvelous diary (1828–1851) records the
changing character of New York City, as well as
his contempt for Jacksonian Democracy and its
Irish immigrant supporters.

John Jacob Astor died this morning, at nine o’clock, in
the eighty-fifth year of his age . . . and left reluctantly
his unbounded wealth. His property is estimated at
$20,000,000, some judicious persons say $30,000,000;
but, at any rate, he was the richest man in the United
States in productive and valuable property; and this
immense, gigantic fortune was the fruit of his own
labor, unerring sagacity, and far-seeing penetration.
He came to this country at twenty years of age;
penniless, friendless, without inheritance, without
education . . . but with a determination to be rich,
and ability to carry it into effect. His capital consisted
of a few trifling musical instruments, which he got
from his brother, George Astor, in London, a dealer
in music. . . . The fur trade was the philosopher’s stone
of this modem Croesus; beaver-skins and musk-rats
furnished the oil for the supply of Aladdin’s lamp. His
traffic was the shipment of furs to China, where they
brought immense prices, for he monopolized the
business; and the return cargoes of teas, silks, and
rich productions of China brought further large
profits. . . . My brother and I found in Mr. Astor a
valuable customer. . . . All he touched turned to gold.

5.  Editorial in the New York Herald, April 5, 1848.
John Jacob Astor’s will included a bequest of
$400,000 for the establishment of what became
the New York Public Library. This editorial ques-
tioned whether this relatively meager bequest
adequately repaid residents.

If we had been an associate of John Jacob Astor the first
idea that we should have put into his head would have
been that one-half of his immense property — ten million
at least — belonged to the people of the city of New York.
During the last fifty years of the life of John Jacob Astor,
his property has been augmented and increased in the
value by the aggregate intelligence, industry, enterprise
and commerce of New York, fully to the amount of one-
half its value. The farms and lots of ground which he

bought forty, twenty and ten and five years ago, have
all increased in value entirely by the industry of the
citizens of New York . . . half of his immense estate,
in its actual value, has accrued to him by the industry
of the community.

Sources: (2) Elbert Hubbard, Little Journeys to the Homes of Great Business Men (New
York: Wm. H. Wise & Co., 1916), 201; (3) Knight’s Penny Magazine, Vol. 1 (London:
Charles Knight & Co., 1846), 97, 107, 108; (4) Philip Hone, The Diary of Philip
Hone, 1828–1851, Vol. 2 (New York: Dodd, Mead and Company, 1889), 347–348;
(5) Gustavus Myers, History of the Great American Fortunes, Vol. 1 (Chicago:
Charles H. Kerr & Company, 1910), 199–200.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  What does the Pewterer’s Banner (source 1) suggest

about personal and by extension national success in the
post-Revolutionary era? What can you infer about arti-
san entrepreneurs in the new republic from this source?

2.  According to John Jacob Astor (source 2) and the cabi-

netmaker (source 3), what traits are important in work?
Based on the sources included here, do you agree with
Astor that good habits make any man rich? Why or
why not?

3.  Sources 2, 4, and 5 all deal with John Jacob Astor. What
do these sources suggest about the road to wealth in
America?

4.  Compare and contrast Hone’s view of Astor (source 4)

with that of the Herald’s editorial (source 5). Then apply
the Herald’s critique to contemporary entrepreneurs
such as Bill Gates of Microsoft or Steve Jobs of Apple.
Are their fortunes also the product, in part, of “the
industry of the community”?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

John Jacob Astor initially made money by trading furs in
local and then in international markets. Next, he specu-
lated in land in booming cities. Finally, he became a rentier,
crafting long-term property leases that guaranteed wealth
to future generations of his family. Using the material in
Chapter 8, explain how a pewterer or a cabinetmaker might
follow a somewhat similar path to wealth in the market
economy of nineteenth-century America. Noting also the
statement “All her Sons Join as One Social Band” (source 1),
explain why other Americans were critical of the rise of such
ambitious capitalist entrepreneurs.

253

