254

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

his clocks for a dining table, a bedstead, and labor on
his small farm. Then various artisans — shipbuilders in
seacoast  towns,  ironworkers  in  Pennsylvania  and
Maryland, clockmakers in Con necticut, and shoemak-
ers in Massachusetts — expanded their output and sold
their products in wider markets.

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did govern-
ments, banks, and
merchants expand
American commerce and
manufacturing between
1780 and 1820?

American  entrepreneurs  drove  this  expansion  of
rural  manufacturing.  Beginning  in  the  1790s,  enter-
prising  merchants  bought  raw
materials,  hired  farm  families  to
process  them,  and  distributed
the finished manufactures. “Straw
hats  and  Bonnets  are  manufac-
tured by many families,” a Maine
census-taker  noted  in  the  1810s.
Merchants  shipped  rural  manu-
factures — shoes,  brooms,  and
palm-leaf  hats  as  well  as  cups,
baking  pans,  and  other  tin  utensils — to  stores  in
seaport  cities.  New  England  peddlers,  who  quickly

acquired  repute  as  hard-bargaining  “Yankees,”  sold
them throughout the rural South.

New technology initially played only a minor role
in producing this boom in consumer goods. Take the
case  of  textile  production.  During  the  1780s,  New
England  and  Middle  Atlantic  merchants  built  water-
powered  mills  to  run  machines  that  combed  wool —
and later cotton — into long strands. However, until the
1810s, they used the household-based outwork system
for the next steps: farm women and children spun the
machine-combed  strands  into  thread  and  yarn  on
foot-driven spinning wheels, and men in other house-
holds used foot-powered looms to weave the yarn into
cloth.  In  1820,  more  than  12,000  household  workers
labored full-time weaving woolen cloth, which water-
powered  fulling  mills  then  pounded  flat,  giving  the
cloth  a  smooth  finish. By  then,  the  transfer  of  textile
production to factories was gaining speed; the number
of  water-driven  cotton  spindles  soared  from  8,000  in
1809 to 333,000 in 1817.

The Yankee Peddler, c. 1830

Even in 1830, many Americans lived too far from a market town to go there regularly to buy goods. Instead,
they purchased their tinware, clocks, textiles, and other manufactures from peddlers, often from New
England, who traveled far and wide in small horse-drawn vans like the one visible through the doorway.
Collection IBM Corporation, Armonk, New York.

