CHAPTER 8

  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820

255

The growth of manufacturing offered farm families
new  opportunities — and  new  risks.  Ambitious  New
England  farmers  switched  from  subsistence  crops  of
wheat and potatoes to raising livestock. They sold meat,
butter,  and  cheese  to  city  markets  and  cattle  hides  to
the  booming  shoe  industry.  “Along  the  whole  road
from  Boston,  we  saw  women  engaged  in  making
cheese,”  a  Polish  traveler  reported.  Other  families
raised sheep and sold raw wool to textile manufactur-
ers. Processing these raw materials brought new jobs
and  income  to  stagnating  farming  towns.  In  1792,
Concord, Massachusetts, had one slaughterhouse and
five  small  tanneries;  a  decade  later,  the  town  boasted
eleven slaughterhouses and six large tanneries.

As the rural economy churned out more goods, it
altered  the  environment.  Foul  odors  from  stockyards
and  tanning  pits  wafted  over  Concord  and  other
leather-producing towns. Nor was that all. Tanners cut
down  thousands  of  acres  of  hemlock  trees,  using  the
bark to process stiff cow hides into pliable leather. More
trees fell to the ax to create pasturelands for huge herds
of livestock — dairy cows, cattle, and especially sheep.
By 1850, most of the ancient forests in southern New
England and eastern New York were gone: “The hills
had been stripped of their timber,” New York’s Catskill
Messenger reported, “so as to present their huge, rocky
projections.” Moreover, scores of textile milldams dot-
ted New England’s rivers, altering their flow and pre-
venting fish — already severely depleted from decades
of  overfishing — from  reaching  upriver  spawning
grounds. Even as the income of farmers rose, the qual-
ity of their natural environment declined.

In the new capitalist-driven market economy, rural
parents and their children worked longer and harder.
They made yarn, hats, and brooms during the winter
and  returned  to  their  regular  farming  chores  during
the warmer seasons. More important, these farm fami-
lies  now  depended  on  their  wage  labor  or  market
sales to purchase the textiles, shoes, and hats they had
once made for themselves. The new productive system
made  families  and  communities  more  efficient  and
prosperous — and  more  dependent  on  a  market  they
could not control.

New  Transportation  Systems  The  expansion  of
the market depended on improvements in transporta-
tion,  where  governments  also  played  a  crucial  role.
Between 1793 and 1812, the Massachusetts legislature
granted  charters  to  more  than  one  hundred  private
turnpike corporations. These charters gave the compa-
nies special legal status and often included monopoly
rights  to  a  transportation  route.  Pennsylvania  issued
fifty-five  charters,  including  one  to  the  Lancaster

Turnpike Company, which built a 65-mile graded and
graveled  toll  road  to  Philadelphia.  The  road  quickly
boosted  the  regional  economy.  Although  turnpike
investors received only about “three percent annually,”
Henry  Clay  estimated,  society  as  a  whole  “actually
reap[ed]  fifteen  or  twenty  percent.”  A  farm  woman
agreed: “The turnpike is finished and we can now go to
town  at  all  times  and  in  all  weather.”  New  turnpikes
soon  connected  dozens  of  inland  market  centers  to
seaport cities.

Water transport was even quicker and cheaper, so
state governments and private entrepreneurs dredged
shallow rivers and constructed canals to bypass water-
falls and rapids. For their part, farmers in Kentucky and
Tennessee and in southern Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois
settled near the Ohio River and its many tributaries, so
they could easily get goods to market. Similarly, specu-
lators  hoping  to  capitalize  on  the  expansion  of  com-
merce bought up property in the cities along the banks
of  major  rivers:  Cincinnati,  Louisville,  Chattanooga,
and St. Louis. Farmers and merchants built barges to
carry  cotton,  grain,  and  meat  downstream  to  New
Orleans, which by 1815 was exporting about $5 million
in agricultural products yearly.

Public Enterprise:
The Commonwealth System
Legislative  charters  for  banks,  turnpikes,  and  canal
companies  reflected  the  ideology  of  mercantilism:
government-assisted  economic  development.  Just  as
Parliament  had  used  the  Navigation  Acts  to  spur
British  prosperity,  so  American  legislatures  enacted
laws “of great public utility” to increase the “common
wealth.”  These  statutes  generally  took  the  form  of
special charters that bestowed legal privileges, such as
the power of eminent domain, that allowed turnpike,
bridge, and canal corporations to force the sale of pri-
vately owned land along their routes. State legislatures
also  aided  capital-intensive  flour  millers  and  textile
manufacturers, who flooded adjacent farmland as they
built dams to power their water-driven machinery. In
Massachusetts,  the  Mill  Dam  Act  of  1795  deprived
farmers of their traditional common-law right to stop
the  flooding  and  forced  them  to  accept  “fair  com-
pensation” for their lost acreage. Judges approved this
state-ordered  shift  in  property
rights.  “The  establishment  of  a
great mill-power for manufactur-
ing  purposes,”  Justice  Lemuel
Shaw  intoned,  was  “one  of  the
great  industrial  pursuits  of  the
commonwealth.”

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Did state mercantilism (the
grant of privileges and
charters) embody repub-
lican ideology or violate it?

