256

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

View of Cincinnati, by John Caspar Wild, c. 1835

Thanks to its location on the Ohio River (a tributary of the Mississippi), Cincinnati quickly became one of the
major processing centers for grain and hogs in the trans-Appalachian west. By the 1820s, passenger
steamboats and freight barges connected the city with Pittsburgh to the north and the ocean port of New
Orleans far to the south. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, M. and M. Karolik Collection.

Critics  condemned  the  legal  privileges  given  to
private  enterprises  as  “Scheme[s]  of  an  evident  anti-
republican tendency,” as some “freeholder citizens” in
Putney, Vermont, put it. Such grants to business cor-
porations,  they  argued,  violated  the  “equal  rights”  of
citizens  and  infringed  on  the  sovereignty  of  the  gov-
ernments. “Whatever power is given to a corporation,
is just so much power taken from the State,” argued a
Pennsylvanian. Nonetheless, judges in state courts, fol-
lowing  the  lead  of  John  Marshall’s  Supreme  Court
(Chapter  7),  consistently  upheld  corporate  charters
and  grants  of  eminent  domain  to  private  transporta-
tion companies. “The opening of good and easy inter-
nal  communications  is  one  of  the  highest  duties  of
government,” declared a New Jersey judge.

State mercantilism soon spread beyond transporta-
tion. Following Jefferson’s embargo of 1807, which cut
off  goods  and  credit  from  Europe,  the  New  England

states  awarded  charters  to  two  hundred  iron-mining,
textile-manufacturing, and banking companies, while
Pennsylvania  granted  more  than  eleven  hundred.  By
1820, state governments had created a republican polit-
ical economy: a Commonwealth System that funneled
state  aid  to  private  businesses  whose  projects  would
improve the general welfare.

Toward a Democratic
Republican Culture
After independence, many Americans in the northern
states embraced a democratic republicanism that cele-
brated political equality and social mobility. These citi-
zens, primarily members of the emerging middle class,
redefined the nature of the family and of education by

