CHAPTER 8

  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820

257

seeking egalitarian marriages and affectionate ways of
rearing their children.

Opportunity and Equality —
for White Men
Between  1780  and  1820,  hundreds  of  well-educated
visitors agreed that the American social order was dif-
ferent from that of Europe. In his famous Letters from
an  American  Farmer  (1782),  French-born  essayist
J. Hector St. Jean de Crèvecoeur wrote that European
society  was  composed  “of  great  lords  who  possess
everything, and of a herd of people who have nothing.”
By  contrast,  the  United  States  had  “no  aristocratical
families, no courts, no kings, no bishops.”

The absence of a hereditary aristocracy encouraged
Americans to condemn inherited social privilege and
to extol legal equality. “The law is the same for every-
one,” noted  one European traveler. Yet citizens of the
new  republic  willingly  accepted  social  divisions  that
reflected  personal  achievement,  a  phenomenon  that
astounded many Europeans. “In Europe to say of some-
one  that  he  rose  from  nothing  is  a  disgrace  and  a

reproach,” remarked a Polish aris-
tocrat. “It is the opposite here. To
be the architect of your own for-
tune is honorable. It is the highest
recommendation.”

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors encouraged —
and inhibited — equality
and democracy in early-
nineteenth-century
American life?

Some  Americans  from  long-
distinguished families felt threat-
ened by the ideology of wealth-driven social mobility.
“Man  is  estimated  by  dollars,”  complained  Nathaniel
Booth, whose high-status family had once dominated
the  small  Hudson  River  port  town  of  Kingston,  New
York. However, for most white men, a merit-based sys-
tem meant the chance to better themselves (Map 8.1).
Old  cultural  rules — and  new  laws — denied  such
chances to most women and African American men.
When women and free blacks asked for voting rights,
male legislators wrote explicit race and gender restric-
tions  into  the  law.  In  1802,  Ohio  disenfranchised
African Americans, and the New York constitution of
1821  imposed  a  property-holding  requirement  on
black voters. A striking case of sexual discrimination
occurred in New Jersey, where the state constitution of
1776 had granted the voting franchise to all property

1800

C A N A D A

1830

C A N A D A

MAINE
(MASS.)

VT.

NEW
YORK

N.H.

MASS.
CT.

R.I.

NORTHWEST
TERRITORY

INDIANA

TERRITORY

PA.

MD.

KY.

TENN.

VA.

N.C.

S.C.

MISSISSIPPI
TERRITORY

GA.

N.J.

DEL.

N

W

E

S

Property
qualifications
Taxpayer
qualifications
Universal white
male suffrage

MAINE

VT.

N.H.

MASS.
CT.

NEW
YORK

R.I.

MICHIGAN  TERRITORY

OHIO

ILL.

IND.

PA.

MD.

N.J.

DEL.

KY.

TENN.

MISS.

ALA.

GA.

MO.

ARK.
TERR.

LA.

VA.

N.C.

S.C.

FLA.

N

W

E

S

Property
qualifications
Taxpayer
qualifications
Universal white
male suffrage

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

MAP 8.1
The Expansion of Voting Rights for White Men, 1800 and 1830

Between 1800 and 1830, the United States moved steadily toward political equality for white
men. Many existing states revised their constitutions and replaced a property qualiﬁcation for
voting with less restrictive criteria, such as paying taxes or serving in the militia. Some new states
in the West extended the suffrage to all adult white men. As parties sought votes from a broader
electorate, the tone of politics became more open and competitive — swayed by the interests and
values of ordinary people.

