258

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

holders. As Federalists and Republicans competed for
power, they ignored customary gender rules and urged
property-owning  single  women  and  widows  to  vote.
Sensing  a  threat  to  men’s  monopoly  on  politics,  the
New  Jersey  legislature  in  1807  invoked  both  biology
and custom to limit voting to men only: “Women, gen-
erally, are neither by nature, nor habit, nor education,
nor  by  their  necessary  condition  in  society  fitted  to
perform this duty with credit to themselves or advan-
tage to the public.”

Toward Republican Families
The controversy over women’s political rights mirrored
a debate over authority within the household. British
and American husbands had long claimed patriarchal
power and legal control of the family’s property. How-
ever, as John Adams lamented in 1776, the republican
principle  of  equality  had  “spread  where  it  was  not
intended,”  encouraging  his  wife  and  other  women  to
demand legal and financial rights. Patriot author and
historian Mercy Otis Warren argued that patriarchy was
not a “natural” rule but a social contrivance and could
be justified only “for the sake of order in families.”

To see a longer excerpt of the Mercy Otis Warren
document, along with other primary sources from
this period, see Sources for America’s History.

Republican  Marriages  Economic  and  cultural
changes also eroded customary paternal authority. In
colonial America, most property-owning parents had
arranged their children’s marriages. They looked for a
morally upright son- or daughter-in-law with financial
resources; physical attraction and emotional compati-
bility between the young people were secondary con-
siderations.  As  landholdings  shrank  in  long-settled
communities,  many  yeomen  fathers  has  less  control
over their children’s marriages because they had fewer
resources to give them.

Increasingly,  young  men  and  women  chose  their
own  partners,  influenced  by  a  new  cultural  attitude:
sentimentalism. Sentimentalism originated in Europe
as  part  of  the  Romantic  movement  and,  after  1800,
spread quickly through all classes of American society.
Rejecting  the  Enlightenment’s  emphasis  on  rational
thought, sentimentalism celebrated the importance of
“feeling” — a  physical,  sensuous  appreciation  of  God,
nature,  and  fellow  humans.  This  new  emphasis  on
deeply felt emotions pervaded literary works, popular
theatrical melodramas, and the passionate rhetoric of
revivalist preachers.

As the passions of the heart overwhelmed the logic
of  the  mind,  magazines  praised  companionate  mar-
riages:  marriages  “contracted  from  motives  of  affec-
tion,  rather  than  of  interest.”  Many  young  people
looked  for  a  relationship  based  on  intimacy  and  a
spouse  who  was,  as  Eliza  Southgate  of  Maine  put
it,  “calculated  to  promote  my  happiness.”  As  young
people “fell in love” and married, many fathers changed
from authoritarian patriarchs to watchful paternalists.
To  guard  against  free-spending  sons-in-law,  wealthy
fathers  often  placed  their  daughters’  inheritance  in  a
legal trust. One Virginia planter told his lawyer “to see
the  property  settlement  properly  drawn  before  the
marriage, for I by no means consent that Polly shall be
left to the Vicissitudes of Life.”

As  voluntary  contracts  between  individuals,  love
marriages  conformed  more  closely  to  republican
principles than did arranged matches. In theory, such
marriages  would  be  companionate,  giving  wives  and
husbands “true equality,” as one Boston man suggested.
In  practice,  husbands  dominated  most  marriages,
because  male  authority  was  deeply  ingrained  in  cul-
tural mores and because American common law gave
husbands  control  of  the  family’s  property.  Moreover,
the new love-based marriage system discouraged par-
ents  from  protecting  young  wives,  and  governments
refused  to  prevent  domestic  tyranny.  The  marriage
contract  “is  so  much  more  important  in  its  conse-
quences to females than to males,” a young man at the
Litchfield Law School in Connecticut astutely observed
in 1820, for “they subject themselves to his authority.
He is their all — their only relative — their only hope”
(American Voices, p. 260).

Young  adults  who  chose  partners  unwisely  were
severely disappointed when their spouses failed as pro-
viders  or  faithful  companions.  Before  1800,  unhappy
wives  and  husbands  could  do  little;  officials  granted
divorces infrequently and then only in cases of neglect,
abandonment,  or  adultery — serious  offenses  against
the  moral  order  of  society.  After  1800,  most  divorce
petitions  cited  emotional  issues.  One  woman  com-
plained that her husband had “ceased to cherish her,”
while a man grieved that his wife had “almost broke his
heart.” Responding to changing cultural values, several
states expanded the legal grounds for divorce to include
drunkenness and personal cruelty.

Republican Motherhood  Traditionally, most Amer-
i can women had spent their active adult years working
as  farmwives  and  bearing  and  nurturing  children.
However,  after  1800,  the  birthrate  in  the  northern
states  dropped  significantly.  In  the  farming  village  of

