CHAPTER 8

  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820

259

The Wedding, 1805

Bride and groom stare intently into each other’s eyes as they exchange vows, suggesting that their union
was a love match, not an arranged marriage based on economic calculation. The plain costumes of the
guests and the sparse furnishings of the room suggest that the unknown artist may have provided us
with a picture of a rural Quaker wedding. The Granger Collection, NYC.

Sturbridge in central Massachusetts, women now bore
an  average  of  six  children;  their  grandmothers  had
usually given birth to eight or nine. In the growing sea-
port  cities,  native-born  white  women  now  bore  an
average of only four children.

The  United  States  was  among  the  first  nations  to
experience  this  sharp  decline  in  the  birthrate — what
historians call the demographic transition. There were
several  causes.  Beginning  in  the  1790s,  thousands  of
young  men  migrated  to  the  trans-Appalachian  west,
which increased the number of never-married women
in  the  East  and  delayed  marriage  for  many  more.
Women who married in their late twenties had fewer
children. In addition, white urban middle-class couples
deliberately  limited  the  size  of  their  families.  Fathers
wanted  to  leave  children  an  adequate  inheritance,
while mothers, influenced by new ideas of individual-
ism and self-achievement, refused to spend their entire
adulthood  rearing  children.  After  having  four  or  five
children, these couples used birth control or abstained
from sexual intercourse.

Even as women bore fewer children, they accepted
greater responsibility for the welfare of the family. In
his Thoughts on Female Education (1787), Philadelphia

physician  Benjamin  Rush  argued  that  young  women
should  ensure  their  husbands’  “perseverance  in  the
paths  of  rectitude”  and  called  for  loyal  “republican
mothers” who would instruct “their sons in the prin-
ciples of liberty and government.”

To see a longer excerpt of Thoughts on Female
Education, along with other primary sources from
this period, see Sources for America’s History.

Christian  ministers  readily  embraced  this  idea
of  republican  motherhood.  “Preserving  virtue  and
instructing the young are not the fancied, but the real
‘Rights  of  Women,’ ”  the  Reverend  Thomas  Bernard
told  the  Female  Charitable  Society  of  Salem,  Massa-
chusetts. He urged his audience to dismiss public roles
for women, such as voting or serv-
ing  on  juries,  that  English  femi-
nist  Mary  Wollstonecraft  had
advocated in A Vindica tion of the
Rights of Woman (1792). Instead,
women should care for their chil-
dren,  a  responsibility  that  gave

IDENTIFY CAUSES
How did republican ideals,
new economic circum-
stances, and changing
cultural values affect mar-
riage practices?

