A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

The Trials of

Married Life

As  the  text  explains,  the  ideal  American  marriage  of  the  early  nineteenth
century was republican (a contract between equals) and romantic (a match in
which mutual love was foremost). Were these ideals attainable, given the social
authority  of  men  and  the  volatility  of  human  passions?  Letters,  memoirs,  and
diaries  are  excellent  sources  for  answering  these  questions.  These  selections
from the personal writings of a variety of American women offer insights into
the new system of marriage and how changes in cultural values intersected with
individual lives.

Emma Hart Willard
The Danger of High Expectations

Born  in  Connecticut  in  1787,  Emma  Hart  married  John
Willard in 1809. An early proponent of advanced education
for women, she founded female academies in Middlebury,
Vermont (1814), and Waterford and Troy, New York (1821).
She wrote this letter to her sister, Almira Hart, in 1815.

You think it strange that I should consider a period of
happiness as more likely than any other to produce future
misery. I know I did not sufficiently explain myself. Those
tender and delicious sensations which accompany suc-
cessful love, while they soothe and soften the mind,
diminish its strength to bear or to conquer difficulties.
It is the luxury of the soul; and luxury always ener-
vates. . . . This life is a life of vicissitude. . . .

[Suppose] you are secured to each other for life. It
will be natural that, at first, he should be much devoted
to you; but, after a while, his business must occupy his
attention. While absorbed in that he will perhaps neglect
some of those little tokens of affection which have become
necessary to your happiness. His affairs will sometimes go
wrong, . . . and he may sometimes hastily give you a harsh
word or a frown.

But where is the use, say you, of diminishing my
present enjoyment by such gloomy apprehensions? Its
use is this, that, if you enter the marriage state believ-
ing such things to be absolutely impossible, if you
should meet them, they would come upon you with
double force.

Caroline Howard Gilman
Female Submission in Marriage

Born in Boston in 1794, Caroline Howard married in 1819
and  moved  to  Charleston,  South  Carolina,  with  her
husband, Samuel Gilman, a Unitarian minister. A novelist,
she  published  Recollections  of  a  Housekeeper  (1835),  a
portrait of domestic life in New England, and Recollections

260

of  a  Southern  Matron  (1838),  a  ﬁctional  account  that
includes this selection.

The planter’s bride, who leaves a numerous and cheerful
family in her paternal home, little imagines the change
which awaits her in her own retired residence. She dreams
of an independent sway over her household, devoted love
and unbroken intercourse with her husband, and indeed
longs to be released from the eyes of others, that she may
dwell only beneath the sunbeam of his. And so it was
with me. . . .

There we were together, asking for nothing but
each other’s presence and love. At length it was neces-
sary for him to tear himself away to superintend his
interests. . . . But the period of absence was gradually
protracted; then a friend sometimes came home with him,
and their talk was of crops and politics, draining the fields
and draining the revenue. . . . A growing discomfort began
to work upon my mind. I had undefined forebodings; I
mused about past days; my views of life became slowly
disorganized; my physical powers enfeebled; a nervous
excitement followed: I nursed a moody discontent. . . .

If the reign of romance was really waning, I resolved
not to chill his noble confidence, but to make a steadier
light rise on his affections. . . . This task of self-government
was not easy. To repress a harsh answer, to confess a
fault . . . in gentle submission, sometimes requires
a struggle like life and death; but these . . . efforts are
the golden threads with which domestic happiness
is woven. . . . How clear is it, then, that woman loses
by petulance and recrimination! Her first study must
be self-control, almost to hypocrisy. A good wife must
smile amid a thousand perplexities.

Martha Hunter Hitchcock
Isolation, Unmentionable Sorrows,
and Suffering

Martha  Hunter  Hitchcock  married  a  doctor  in  the  U.S.
Army. These excerpts from letters, in the Virginia Historical

