Society, to her cousins Martha and Sarah Hunter describe
her  emotional  dependence  on  her  husband  and  her
unhappy life.

To Martha Hunter, 1840:

If I had never married how much of pain, and dissat-
isfaction, should I have escaped — at all events I should
never have known what jealousy is. You must not betray
me, dear cousin, for despite all my good resolutions, I
find it impossible always to struggle against my nature —
the school of indulgence, in which I was educated, was
little calculated to teach me, those lessons of forbearance,
which I have had to practice so frequently, since my mar-
riage — it is ungrateful in me to murmur, if perchance a
little bitter is mingled in my cup of life.

To Sarah Hunter, 1841:

I have lived so long among strangers since my mar-
riage, that when I contrast it with the old warm affection,
in which I was nurtured, the contrast is so terrible, that I
cannot refrain from weeping at the thought of it — I hope
my dear cousin, that yours, will be a happier destiny than
mine, in that respect — only think of it! Nearly a year
and a half have passed away, since I have seen, a single
relation!

To Martha Hunter, 1845:

Uneasiness about [my daughter] Lillie, and very great

sorrows of my own, which I cannot commit to paper,
have almost weighed me down to the grave; and indeed,
without any affectation, I look forward to that, as the only
real rest, I shall ever know.

To Martha Hunter, 1846:

Lillie had the scarlet fever, during our visit to

Alabama, and she has never recovered from the effects of
it — My life is a constant vigil — and there is nothing
which wearies mind, and body, so much, as watching a
sickly child. . . . All this I have to endure, and may have to
suffer more for I know not, what Fate may have in store
for me.

Elizabeth Scott Neblett
My Seasons of Gloom and Despondency

Elizabeth  Scott  Neblett  lived  with  her  husband  and  chil-
dren in Navarro County, Texas. In 1860, she reﬂected in her
diary  on  her  bouts  of  depression  and  the  difﬁculties  of

wives  and  husbands  in  understanding  each  other’s  inner
lives.

It has now been almost eight years since I became a mar-
ried woman. Eight years of checkered good and ill, and
yet thro’ all it seems the most of the ill has fallen to my lot,
until now my poor weak cowardly heart sighs only for its
final resting place, where sorrow grief nor pain can never
reach it more.

I feel that I have faithfully discharged my duty towards
you and my children, but for this I know that I deserve no
credit nor aspire to none; my affection has been my
prompter, and the task has proven a labor of love. You
have not rightly understood me at all times, and being
naturally very hopeful you could in no measure sympa-
thize with me during my seasons of gloom and
despondency. . . . But marriage is a lottery and that your
draw proved an unfortunate one on your part is not less a
subject of regret with me than you. . . .

It is useless to say that during these eight years I have

suffered ten times more than you have and ten times
more than I can begin to make you conceive of, but of
course you can not help the past, nor by knowing my suf-
fering relieve it, but it might induce you to look with
more kindness upon [my] faults. . . . The 17th of this
month I was 27 years old and I think my face looks older
than that, perhaps I’ll never see an other birth day and I
don’t grieve at the idea.

Source: These selections are abridged versions of materials in Anya Jabour, ed., Major
Problems in the History of American Families and Children (Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
2005), 108–113.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  What problems do these women share? How might their
problems reﬂect larger social and economic issues in
nineteenth-century America?

2.  How would you characterize the unhappiness of these

women? In what ways is it related to their expectations
about love-based marriage?

3.  What was Caroline Gilman’s advice to wives? How does

it apply to the other women in this section?

4.  Do these selections suggest that most American women
had unfulﬁlled marriages? Or were these isolated cases?
Would you expect to ﬁnd more records of happy or
unhappy marriages?

261

