262

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

them “an extensive power over the fortunes of man in
every generation.”

Raising Republican Children
Republican values changed assumptions about inheri-
tance  and  child  rearing.  English  common  law  en-
couraged  primogeniture,  the  bequest  of  the  family’s
property to the eldest son (Chapter 1). After the Rev-
olution, most state legislatures enacted statutes speci-
fying  equal  division  of  the  estate  among  all  children,
when  there  was  no  will.  Most  American  parents
applauded  these  statutes  because  they  were  already
treating their children equally and with respect.

Two Modes of Parenting
Indeed, many European
visitors  believed  that  republican  parents  gave  their
children  too  much  respect  and  freedom.  Because  of
the  “general  ideas  of  Liberty  and  Equality  engraved
on their hearts,” a Polish aristocrat suggested around
1800,  American  children  had  “scant  respect”  for
their parents. Several decades later, a British traveler
stood  dumb founded  when  an  American  father
excused his son’s “resolute disobedience” with a smile
and the remark, “A sturdy republican, sir.” The traveler

speculated  that  American  parents  encouraged  such
independence to prepare youth to “go their own way”
in the world.

Permissive child rearing was not universal. Foreign
visitors  interacted  primarily  with  well-to-do  Episco-
palians  and  Presbyterians  who  held  an  Enlightenment
conception  of  children.  This  outlook,  transmitted  by
religious authors influenced by John Locke, viewed chil-
dren  as  “rational  creatures”  best  trained  by  means  of
advice and praise. The parents’ role was to develop their
child’s conscience, self-discipline, and sense of responsi-
bility.  Families  in  the  rapidly  expanding  middle  class
widely adopted this rationalist method of child rearing.
By  contrast,  many  yeomen  and  tenant  farmers,
influenced  by  the  Second  Great  Awakening,  raised
their children in an authoritarian fashion. Evangelical
Baptist  and  Methodist  writers  insisted  that  children
were “full of the stains and pollution of sin” and needed
strict rules and harsh discipline. Fear was a “useful and
necessary  principle  in  family  government,”  minister
John Abbott advised parents; a child “should submit to
your authority, not to your arguments or persuasions.”
Abbott told parents to instill humility in children and
to teach them to subordinate their personal desires to
God’s will.

The Battle over Education

Here an unknown artist pokes fun at a
tyrannical schoolmaster and, indirectly,
at the strict approach to child rearing
taken by evangelical authors, parents,
and teachers. The students’ faces reﬂect
the artist’s own rationalist outlook. One
Enlightenment-minded minister suggested
that we see in young children’s eyes “the
ﬁrst dawn of reason, beaming forth its
immortal rays.” Picture Research Consultants &
Archives.

