CHAPTER 8

  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820

263

Women’s Education

Even in education-conscious New England,
before 1800 few girls attended free public
primary schools for more than a few years.
Subsequently, as this detail from Scenes
from a Seminary for Young Ladies (c. 1810–
1820) indicates, some girls stayed in school
into their teenage years and studied a wide
variety of subjects, including geography.
Many graduates of these female acade-
mies became teachers, a new ﬁeld of
employment for women. The St. Louis Art
Museum, Missouri, USA/The Bridgeman Art
Library.

Debates  over  Education  Although  families  pro-
vided most moral and intellectual training, republican
ideology  encouraged  publicly  supported  schooling.
Bostonian  Caleb  Bingham,  an  influential  textbook
author, called for “an equal distribution of knowledge
to  make  us  emphatically  a  ‘republic  of  letters.’ ”  Both
Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Rush proposed ambi-
tious schemes for a comprehensive system of primary
and secondary schooling, followed by college training
for bright young men. They also envisioned a univer-
sity in which distinguished scholars would lecture on
law, medicine, theology, and political economy.

To ordinary citizens, whose teenage children had to
labor in the fields or workshops, talk of secondary and
college education smacked of elitism. Farmers, artisans,
and  laborers  wanted  elementary  schools  that  would
instruct  their  children  in  the  “three  Rs” — reading,
’riting, and ’rithmetic — and make them literate enough
to read the Bible. In New England, locally funded pub-
lic schools offered basic instruction to most boys and
some  girls.  In  other  regions,  there  were  few  publicly
supported schools, and only 25 percent of the boys and
perhaps 10 percent of the girls attended private institu-
tions  or  had  personal  tutors.  Even  in  New  England,
only a few young men and almost no young women
went on to grammar school (high school), and less than
1 percent of men attended college. “Let anybody show
what advantage the poor man receives from colleges,”
an  anonymous  “Old  Soldier”  wrote  to  the  Mary land
Gazette. “Why should they support them, unless it is to
serve those who are in affluent circumstances, whose
children  can  be  spared  from  labor,  and  receive  the
benefits?”

Although  many  state  constitutions  encouraged
support  for  education,  few  legislatures  acted  until
the  1820s.  Then  a  new  generation  of  educational

reformers,  influenced  by  merchants  and  manufac-
turers,  raised  standards  by  certifying  qualified  teach-
ers  and  appointing  statewide  superintendents  of
schools.  To  encourage  students,
the  reformers  chose  textbooks
such  as  Parson  Mason  Weems’s
The  Life  of  George  Washington
(c.  1800),  which  praised  honesty
and  hard  work  and  condemned
gambling, drinking, and laziness.
To  bolster  patriotism  and  shared
cultural ideals, reformers required
the study of American history. As
a  New  Hampshire  schoolboy,  Thomas  Low  recalled:
“We were taught every day and in every way that ours
was the freest, the happiest, and soon to be the greatest
and most powerful country of the world.”

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Which form of child
rearing — the rationalist
or the authoritarian — was
the most compatible with
republican values and
why?

Promoting  Cultural  Independence  Like  Caleb
Bingham,  writer  Noah  Webster  wanted  to  raise  the
nation’s  intellectual  prowess.  Asserting  that  “America
must be as independent in literature as she is in poli-
tics,” he called on his fellow citizens to free themselves
“from the dependence on foreign opinions and man-
ners, which is fatal to the efforts of genius in this coun-
try.”  Webster’s  Dissertation  on  the  English  Language
(1789)  celebrated  language  as  a  marker  of  national
identity  by  defining  words  according  to  American
usage.  With  less  success,  it  proposed  that  words  be
spelled as they were pronounced, that labour (British
spelling), for example, be spelled labur. Still, Webster’s
famous  “blue-back  speller,”  a  compact  textbook  first
published in 1783, sold 60 million copies over the next
half century and served the needs of Americans of all
backgrounds. “None of us was ’lowed to see a book,” an
enslaved African American recalled, “but we gits hold

