264

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

of  that  Webster’s  old  blue-back  speller  and  we . . .
studies [it].”

Despite Webster’s efforts, a republican literary cul-
ture  developed  slowly.  Ironically,  the  most  successful
writer in the new republic was Washington Irving, an
elitist-minded  Federalist.  His  whimsical  essay  and
story  collections — which  included  the  tales  of  “Rip
Van Winkle” and “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow” — sold
well in America and won praise abroad. Frustrated by
the immaturity of American cultural life, Irving lived
for  seventeen  years  in  Europe,  reveling  in  its  aristo-
cratic culture and intense intellectuality.

Apart  from  Irving,  no  American  author  was  well
known in Europe or, indeed, in the United States. “Lit-
erature is not yet a distinct profession with us,” Thomas
Jefferson  told  an  English  friend.  “Now  and  then  a
strong mind arises, and at its intervals from business
emits a flash of light. But the first object of young soci-
eties  is  bread  and  covering.”  Not  until  the  1830s  and
1840s would American authors achieve a professional
identity and make a significant contribution to Western
literature (Chapter 11).

Aristocratic Republicanism
and Slavery
Republicanism in the South differed significantly from
that in the North. Enslaved Africans constituted one-
third of the South’s population; their bondage contra-
dicted the new nation’s professed ideology of freedom
and equality. “How is it that we hear the loudest yelps
for  liberty  among  the  drivers  of  Negroes?”  British
author Samuel Johnson had chided the American reb-
els in 1775, a point that some Patriots took to heart. “I
wish most sincerely there was not a Slave in the prov-
ince,” Abigail Adams confessed to her husband, John.
“It  always  appeared  a  most  iniquitous  Scheme  to
me — to fight ourselves for what we are daily robbing
and plundering from those who have as good a right to
freedom as we have.”

The Revolution and Slavery,
1776–1800
In  fact,  the  whites’  struggle  for  independence  had
raised the prospect of freedom for blacks. As the Revo-
lutionary War began, a black preacher in Georgia told
his  fellow  slaves  that  King  George  III  “came  up  with
the Book [the Bible], and was about to alter the World,
and  set  the  Negroes  free.”  Similar  rumors,  probably

prompted by Royal Governor Lord Dunmore’s procla-
mation of 1775 (Chapter 5), circulated among slaves in
Virginia  and  the  Carolinas,  prompting  thousands  of
African  Americans  to  flee  behind  British  lines.  Two
neighbors  of  Virginia  Patriot  Richard  Henry  Lee  lost
“every slave they had in the world,” as did many other
planters.  In  1781,  when  the  British  army  evacuated
Charleston, more than 6,000 former slaves went with
them;  another  4,000  left  from  Savannah.  All  told,
30,000 blacks may have fled their owners. Hundreds of
freed  black  Loyalists  settled  permanently  in  Canada.
More  than  1,000  others,  poorly  treated  in  British
Nova Scotia, sought a better life in Sierra Leone, West

Republican Families . . . and Servants

Around 1828, an unidentiﬁed artist painted this York,
Pennsylvania, family with an African American servant.
The artist gives equal emphasis to the wife and the hus-
band, suggesting they enjoyed a companionate-style
marriage. Reﬂecting the outlook of republican mother-
hood, the mother takes the leading role in educating the
children. The family, probably of upper-middle-class status
given their attire and furnishings, employs an African
American woman as a domestic servant and nanny —
common occupations among free black women of the
time. The Saint Louis Art Museum, Missouri, USA/The Bridgeman
Art Library.

