CHAPTER 8

  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820

265

Africa,  a  settlement  founded  by  English  antislavery
organizations.

Manumission  and  Gradual  Emancipation  Yet
thousands of African Americans supported the Patriot
cause. Eager to raise their social status, free blacks in
New  England  volunteered  for  military  service  in  the
First  Rhode  Island  Company  and  the  Massachusetts
“Bucks.” In Maryland, some slaves took up arms for the
rebels in return for the promise of freedom. Enslaved
Virginians struck informal bargains with their Patriot
owners, trading loyalty in wartime for the hope of lib-
erty.  Following  the  Virginia  legislature’s  passage  of  a
manumission act in 1782, allowing owners to free their
slaves, 10,000 slaves won their freedom.

Two other developments — one religious, the other
intellectual — encouraged manumission. Beginning in
the  1750s,  Quaker  evangelist  John  Woolman  urged
Friends to free their slaves, and many did so. Rapidly
growing  evangelical  churches,  especially  Methodists
and Baptists, initially advocated slave emancipation; in
1784,  a  conference  of  Virginia  Methodists  declared

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Why did aristocratic repub-
licanism develop in the
South, and what were its
deﬁning features?

that  slavery  was  “contrary  to  the
Golden  Law  of  God  on  which
hang all the Law and Prophets.”

inherently

Meanwhile,  Enlightenment
philosophy  challenged  the  wide-
spread  belief  among  whites  that
Africans  were
inferior  to  Europeans.
According  to  John  Locke,  ideas  were  not  innate  but
stemmed  from  a  person’s  experiences  in  the  world.
Pointing  out  the  obvious — “A  state  of  slavery  has  a
mighty  tendency  to  shrink  and  contract  the  minds
of men” — Enlightenment-influenced Americans sug-
gested  that  the  debased  condition  of  blacks  reflected
their  oppressive  captivity.  Quaker  philanthropist
Anthony  Benezet  declared  that  African  Americans
were “as capable of improvement as White People” and
funded a Philadelphia school for their education.

Swept along by these religious and intellectual cur-
rents,  legislators  in  northern  states  enacted  gradual
emancipation  statutes  (Map  8.2).  These  laws  recog-
nized white property rights by requiring slaves to buy
their freedom by years — even decades — of additional

MAP 8.2
The Status of Slavery, 1800

In 1775, racial slavery was legal in
all of the British colonies in North
America. By the time the confederated
states achieved their independence
in 1783, the New England region was
mostly free of slavery. By 1800, all
of the states north of Maryland had
provided for the gradual abolition
of slavery, but the process of gradual
emancipation dragged on until the
1830s. Some slave owners in the
Chesapeake region manumitted a
number of their slaves, leaving only
the whites of the Lower South ﬁrmly
committed to racial bondage.

L. Superior

This simple map illustrates a complex process:
the abolition of slavery in the United States up
to 1800. The political boundaries are those of
the states and territories in 1800.

BRITI SH
NORTH AMERICA

VERMONT
(1777)

MAINE
(part of MASS.)
(1780)

L. H
ur
o
n

n
a
g
i
h
c
i
M

.

L

L. Ontario

NEW YORK

L. Erie

PENNSYLVANIA

INDIANA
TERRITORY
(1787)

OHIO
TERRITORY
(1787)

N.H.
(1783)

MASS.
(1780)

RHODE
ISLAND

CONN.

NEW JERSEY

DELAWARE

SPANISH
LOUISIANA

Some areas marked
“free” on the map,
the Indiana Territory,
for example, actually
had slaves dating from
the French colonial days.

KENTUCKY

TENNESSEE

FUTURE
MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY

GEORGIA

VIRGINIA

MARYLAND

N

NORTH CAROLINA

SOUTH
CAROLINA

W

E

S

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

In 1800, the free black population of the
United States numbered about 100,000,
roughly 10 percent of those of African
ancestry. Half of these free blacks lived
in states in which slavery remained
legal until the end of the Civil War.

SPANISH FLORID

A

Gulf of  Me x i co

The three colors show areas where slavery was
legally abolished, where it continued to exist,
and where it was in the process of being eliminated.

(after Paullin)

Free (date when
slavery eliminated)
Gradual abolition
Slave

0

0

100

200 miles

100

200 kilometers

