266

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

labor.  For  example,  the  New  York  Emancipation  Act
of  1799  allowed  slavery  to  continue  until  1828  and
freed  slave  children  only  at  the  age  of  twenty-five.
Consequently,  as  late  as  1810,  almost  30,000  blacks
in  the  northern  states — nearly  one-fourth  of  the
African  Americans  living  there — were  still  enslaved.
Freed  blacks  faced  severe  prejudice from  whites  who
feared  job  competition  and  racial  melding.  When
Massachusetts  judges  abolished  slavery  through  case
law in 1784, the legislature reenacted an old statute that
prohibited whites from marrying blacks, mulattos, or
Indians. For African Americans in the North, freedom
meant second-class citizenship.

Slavery  Defended  The  southern  states  faced  the
most glaring contradiction between liberty and prop-
erty rights, because enslaved blacks represented a huge
financial investment. Some Chesapeake tobacco plant-
ers, moved by evangelical religion or an oversupply of
workers, manumitted their slaves or allowed them to
buy their freedom by working as artisans or laborers.
Such measures gradually brought freedom to one-third
of the African Americans in Maryland.

Farther south, slavery remained ascendant. Fearing
total  emancipation,  hundreds  of  slave  owners  peti-
tioned the Virginia legislature to repeal the manumis-
sion  act.  Heeding  this  demand  to  protect  “the  most
valuable and indispensible Article of our Property, our
Slaves,”  legislators  forbade  further  manumissions  in
1792.  Following  the  lead  of  Thomas  Jefferson,  who
owned  more  than  a  hundred  slaves,  political  leaders
now argued that slavery was a “necessary evil” required
to maintain white supremacy and the luxurious planter
lifestyle.  In  North  Carolina,  legislators  condemned
private  Quaker  manumissions  as  “highly  criminal
and  reprehensible.”  Moreover,  the  slave-hungry  rice-
growing states of South Carolina and Georgia reopened
the Atlantic slave trade. Between 1790 and 1808, mer-
chants  in  Charleston  and  Savannah  imported  about
115,000  Africans,  selling  thousands  to  French  and
American sugar planters in Louisiana.

Debate  in  the  South  over  emancipation  ended  in
1800, when Virginia authorities thwarted an uprising
planned  by  Gabriel  Prosser,  an  enslaved  artisan,  and
hanged  him  and  thirty  of  his  followers.  “Liberty  and
equality have brought the evil upon us,” a letter to the
Virginia  Herald  proclaimed,  denouncing  such  doc-
trines  as  “dangerous  and  extremely  wicked.”  To  pre-
serve their privileged social position, southern leaders
redefined  republicanism.  They  restricted  individual
liberty and legal equality to whites, creating what histo-
rians call a herrenvolk (“master race”) republic.

The North and South Grow Apart
European  visitors  to  the  United  States  agreed  that
North  and  South  had  distinct  characters.  A  British
observer  labeled  New  England  the  home  to  religious
“fanaticism”  but  added  that  “the  lower  orders  of  citi-
zens” there had “a better education, [and were] more
intelligent” than those he met in the South. “The state
of poverty in which a great number of white people live
in  Virginia”  surprised  the  Marquis  de  Chastellux.
Other visitors to the South likewise commented on the
rude manners, heavy drinking, and weak work ethic of
its residents. White tenants and smallholding farmers
seemed only to have a “passion for gaming at the bil-
liard  table,  a  cock-fight  or  cards,”  and  rich  planters
squandered their wealth on extravagant lifestyles while
their slaves endured bitter poverty.

Some  southerners  worried  that  human  bondage
had corrupted white society. “Where there are Negroes
a  White  Man  despises  to  work,”  one  South  Carolina
merchant commented. Moreover, well-to-do planters,
able to hire tutors for their own children, did little to
provide  other  whites  with  elementary  schooling.  In
1800, elected officials in Essex County, Virginia, spent
about 25 cents per person for local government, includ-
ing  schools,  while  their  counterparts  in  Acton,
Massachusetts, allocated about $1 per person. This dif-
ference  in  support  for  education  mattered:  by  the
1820s, nearly all native-born men and women in New
England could read and write, while more than one-
third of white southerners could not.

Slavery  and  National  Politics  As  the  northern
states ended human bondage, the South’s commitment
to slavery became a political issue. At the Philadelphia
convention in 1787, northern delegates had reluctantly
accepted  clauses  allowing  slave  imports  for  twenty
years  and  guaranteeing  the  return  of  fugitive  slaves
(Chapter  6).  Seeking  even  more  protection  for  their
“peculiar institution,” southerners in the new national
legislature won approval of James Madison’s resolution
that  “Congress  have  no  authority  to  interfere  in  the
emancipation  of  slaves,  or  in  the  treatment  of  them
within any of the States.”

Nonetheless,  slavery  remained  a  contested  issue.
The black slave revolt in Haiti brought 6,000 white and
mulatto planters and their slaves to the United States in
1793,  and  stories  of  Haitian  atrocities  frightened
American slave owners (Chapter 7). Meanwhile, north-
ern  politicians  assailed  the  British  impressment  of
American sailors as just “as oppressive and tyrannical
as  the  slave  trade”  and  demanded  the  end  of  both.

