Aristocratic Republicanism in South
Carolina

The money that paid for Drayton Hall came
originally from raising cattle in South Carolina
for sale in the West Indies. At his death in
1717, Thomas Drayton left an estate that
included 1,300 cattle and 46 slaves (both
Native American and African). His third son,
John (1715–1779), used his inheritance to buy
slaves and to create a rice-growing plantation
along the Ashley River. The home he erected
on the site, Drayton Hall (built 1738–1742),
reﬂected the designs of Andrea Palladio, the
Italian Renaissance architect who celebrated
the concepts of classical Roman proportion
and decoration in his widely read The Four
Books of Architecture (1516). Photo courtesy
of Drayton Hall.

When  Congress  outlawed  the  Atlantic  slave  trade  in
1808, some northern representatives demanded an end
to the trade in slaves between states. Southern leaders
responded with a forceful defense of their labor system.
“A large majority of people in the Southern states do
not consider slavery as even an evil,” declared one con-
gressman. The South’s political clout — its domination
of  the  presidency  and  the  Senate — ensured  that  the
national government would protect slavery. American
diplomats  vigorously  demanded  compensation  for
slaves freed by British troops during the War of 1812,
and Congress enacted legislation upholding slavery in
the District of Columbia.

African  Americans  Speak  Out  Heartened  by  the
end  of  the  Atlantic  slave  trade,  black  abolitionists
spoke out. In speeches and pamphlets, Henry Sipkins
and Henry Johnson pointed out that slavery — “relent-
less  tyranny,”  they  called  it — was  a  central  legacy  of
America’s colonial history. For inspiration, they looked
to the Haitian Revolution; for collective support, they
joined in secret societies, such as Prince Hall’s African
Lodge  of  Freemasons  in  Boston.  Initially,  black  (and
white) antislavery advocates hoped that slavery would
die  out  naturally  as  the  tobacco  economy  declined.
However,  a  boom  in  cotton  planting  dramatically
increased the demand for slaves, and Louisiana (1812),
Mississippi  (1817),  and  Alabama  (1819)  joined  the
Union with state constitutions permitting slavery.

As some Americans redefined slavery as a problem
rather than a centuries-old social condition, a group of
prominent citizens founded the American Colonization

CHAPTER 8

  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820

267

Society in 1817. According to Henry Clay — a society
member, Speaker of the House of Representatives, and
a  slave  owner — racial  bondage  hindered  economic
progress.  It  had  placed  his  state  of  Kentucky  “in  the
rear of our neighbors . . . in the state of agriculture, the
progress  of  manufactures,  the  advance  of  improve-
ment, and the general prosperity of society.” Clay and
other  colonizationists  argued  that  slaves  had  to  be
freed and then resettled, in Africa or elsewhere; eman-
cipation  without  removal  would  lead  to  chaos — “a
civil war that would end in the extermination or subju-
gation of the one race or the other.” Given the cotton
boom, few planters responded to the society’s plea. It
resettled  only  about  6,000  African  Americans  in
Liberia, its colony on the west coast of Africa.

into  slavery

Most  free  blacks  strongly  opposed  such  colo-
nization  schemes  because  they  saw  themselves  as
Americans.  As  Bishop  Richard  Allen  of  the  African
Methodist Episcopal Church put it, “[T]his land which
we  have  watered  with  our  tears
and our blood is now our mother
country.” Allen spoke from expe-
rience.  Born
in
Philadelphia in 1760 and sold to a
farmer  in  Delaware,  Allen  grew
up in bondage. In 1777, Freeborn
Garretson,  an  itinerant  preacher,  converted  Allen  to
Methodism  and  convinced  Allen’s  owner  that  on
Judgment Day, slaveholders would be “weighted in the
balance,  and . . . found  wanting.”  Allowed  to  buy  his
freedom, Allen enlisted in the Methodist cause, becom-
ing a “licensed exhorter” and then a regular minister in

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
Why did the colonization
movement of the 1810s
fail?

