268

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

The Reverend Richard Allen and the African Methodist Episcopal Church

One of the best-known African Americans in the early republic, Richard Allen founded a separate congrega-
tion for Philadelphia’s black Methodists, the Bethel Church. Working with other ministers in 1816, he created
the ﬁrst independent black religious domination in the United States — the African Methodist Episcopal
(AME) Church — and became its ﬁrst bishop. Library of Congress / Picture Research Consultants & Archives.

Philadelphia.  In  1795,  Allen  formed  a  separate  black
congregation, the Bethel Church; in 1816, he became
the  first  bishop  of  a  new  denomination:  the  African
Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  Two  years  later,  3,000
African Americans met in Allen’s church to condemn
colonization  and  to  claim  American  citizenship.
Sounding the principles of democratic republicanism,
they  vowed  to  defy  racial  prejudice  and  advance  in
American society using “those opportunities . . . which
the Constitution and the laws allow to all.”

Walker  reported  from  Washington,  that  Tallmadge’s
amendment was “merely the entering wedge and that it
points  already  to  a  total  emancipation  of  the  blacks.”
Mississippi congressman Christopher Rankin accused
his  northern  colleagues  of  brinksmanship:  “You  con-
duct  us  to  an  awful  precipice,  and  hold  us  over  it.”
Underlining their commitment to slavery, southerners
used their power in the Senate — where they held half
the seats — to withhold statehood from Maine, which
was seeking to separate itself from Massachusetts.

The Missouri Crisis, 1819–1821
The  abject  failure  of  colonization  set  the  stage  for  a
major  battle  over  slavery.  In  1818,  Congressman
Nathaniel Macon of North Carolina warned that radi-
cal members of the “bible and peace societies” intended
to place “the question of emancipation” on the national
political agenda. When Missouri applied for admission
to the Union in 1819, Congressman James Tallmadge
of  New  York  did  so:  he  would  support  statehood  for
Missouri  only  if  its  constitution  banned  the  entry  of
new slaves and provided for the emancipation of exist-
ing bonds-people. Missouri whites rejected Tallmadge’s
proposals, and the northern majority in the House of
Representatives blocked the territory’s admission.

White southerners were horrified. “It is believed by
some,  &  feared  by  others,”  Alabama  senator  John

Constitutional Issues
In the ensuing debate, south-
erners advanced three constitutional arguments. First,
they  invoked  the  principle  of  “equal  rights,”  arguing
that Congress could not impose conditions on Missouri
that  it  had  not  imposed  on  other  territories.  Second,
they  maintained  that  the  Constitution  guaranteed  a
state’s sovereignty with respect to its internal affairs and
domestic  institutions,  such  as  slavery  and  marriage.
Finally,  they  insisted  that  Congress  had  no  authority
to infringe on the property rights of individual slave-
holders.  Beyond  those  arguments,  southern  leaders
defended human bondage. Downplaying the proposi-
tion that slavery was a “necessary evil,” they now justi-
fied slavery on religious grounds. “Christ himself gave
a sanction to slavery,” declared Senator William Smith
of South Carolina. “If it be offensive and sinful to own
slaves,”  a  prominent  Mississippi  Methodist  added,  “I

