wish someone would just put his finger on the place in
Holy Writ.”

Controversy  raged  in  Congress  and  the  press  for
two years before Henry Clay devised a series of politi-
cal  agreements  known  collectively  as  the  Missouri
Compromise. Faced with unwavering southern opposi-
tion  to  Tallmadge’s  amendment,  a  group  of  northern
congressmen  deserted  the  antislavery  coalition.  They
accepted a deal that allowed Maine to enter the Union
as a free state in 1820 and Missouri to follow as a slave
state in 1821. This bargain preserved a balance in the
Senate between North and South and set a precedent
for  future  admissions  to  the  Union.  For  their  part,
southern senators accepted the prohibition of slavery
in most of the Louisiana Purchase, all the lands north
of  latitude  36°30'  except  for  the  state  of  Missouri
(Map 8.3).

As they had in the Philadelphia convention of 1787,
white politicians preserved the Union by compromis-
ing over slavery. However, the delegates in Philadelphia
had resolved their sectional differences in two months;
it  took  Congress  two  years  to  work  out  the  Missouri
Compromise, which even then did not command uni-
versal support. “[B]eware,” the Richmond Enquirer pro-
tested  sharply  as  southern  representatives  agreed  to
exclude slavery from most of the Louisiana Purchase:
“What is a territorial restriction to-day becomes a state
restriction  tomorrow.”  The  fate  of  the  western  lands,

CHAPTER 8

  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820

269

enslaved  blacks,  and  the  Union
itself were now intertwined, rais-
ing the specter of civil war and the
end  of  the  American  republican
experiment. As the aging Thomas
Jefferson  exclaimed  during  the
Missouri crisis, “This momentous
question,  like  a  fire-bell  in  the  night,  awakened  and
filled me with terror.”

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What compromises over
slavery did Congress make
to settle the Missouri
crisis?

Protestant Christianity
as a Social Force
Throughout the colonial era, religion played a signifi-
cant  role  in  American  life  but  not  an  overwhelming
one.  Then,  beginning  around  1790,  religious  revivals
planted  the  values  of  Protestant  Christianity  deep  in
the national character and gave a spiritual dimension
to  American  republicanism.  These  revivals  especially
changed the lives of blacks and of women. Thousands
of African Americans became Baptists and Methodists
and created a powerful institution: the black Christian
Church. Evangelical Christianity also gave rise to new
public roles for white women, especially in the North,
and  set  in  motion  long-lasting  movements  for  social
reform.

MAP 8.3
The Missouri Compromise, 1820–1821

The Missouri Compromise resolved for
a generation the issue of slavery in the
lands of the Louisiana Purchase. The
agreement prohibited slavery north of
the Missouri Compromise line (36°30’
north latitude), with the exception of
the state of Missouri. To maintain an
equal number of senators from free
and slave states in the U.S. Congress,
the compromise provided for the
nearly simultaneous admission to
the Union of Missouri and Maine.

MICHIGAN

UNORGANIZED
TERRITORY

C A N A D A

ME.
(Admitted as
free state, 1820)

VT.

N.H.
MASS.
CT.

R.I.

N.Y.

PA.

N.J.

W

ILL.

IND.

OHIO

MD.

DEL.

N

E

S

MO.
(Admitted as
slave state, 1821)

KY.

TENN.

ARKANSAS
TERRITORY

MISS.

ALA.

GA.

VA.

N.C.

S.C.

MEXICAN
POSSESSIONS

LA.

FLORIDA
TERRITORY

Gulf of Mexico

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

0

0

200

400 miles

200

400 kilometers

Free
Slave
Closed to slavery by the
Missouri Compromise
Opened to slavery by the
Missouri Compromise

