270

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

A Republican Religious Order
The  republican  revolution  of  1776  forced  American
lawmakers to devise new relationships between church
and  state.  Previously,  only  the  Quaker-  and  Baptist-
controlled  governments  of  Pennsylvania  and  Rhode
Island  had  rejected  a  legally  established  church  that
claimed everyone as a member and collected compul-
sory religious taxes. Then, a convergence of factors —
Enlightenment principles, wartime needs, and Baptist
ideology — eliminated most state support for religion
and allowed voluntary church membership.

Religious Freedom  Events in Virginia revealed the
dynamics  of  change.  In  1776,  James  Madison  and
George Mason advanced Enlightenment ideas of reli-
gious toleration as they persuaded the state’s constitu-
tional convention to guarantee all Christians the “free
exercise  of  religion.”  This  measure,  which  ended  the
privileged  legal  status  of  the  Anglican  Church,  won
Presbyterian and Baptist support for the independence
struggle. Baptists, who also opposed public support of
religion,  convinced  lawmakers  to  reject  a  tax  bill
(supported by George Washington and Patrick Henry)
that would have funded all Christian churches. Instead,
in  1786,  the  Virginia  legislature  enacted  Thomas
Jefferson’s  bill  for  Establishing  Religious  Freedom,
which made all churches equal in the eyes of the law
and granted direct financial support to none.

Elsewhere,  the  old  order  of  a  single  established
church crumbled away. In New York and New Jersey,
the  sheer  number  of  denominations — Episcopalian,
Presbyterian, Dutch Reformed, Lutheran, and Quaker,
among  others — prevented  lawmakers  from  agreeing
on an established church or compulsory religious taxes.
Congregationalism remained the official church in the
New  England  states  until  the  1830s,  but  members  of
other denominations could now pay taxes to their own
churches.

Church-State Relations  Few influential Americans
wanted  a  complete  separation  of  church  and  state
because  they  believed  that  religious  institutions  pro-
moted  morality  and  governmental  authority.  “Pure
religion and civil liberty are inseparable companions,”
a  group  of  North  Carolinians
advised their minister. “It is your
particular duty to enlighten man-
kind with the unerring principles
of  truth  and  justice,  the  main
props  of  all  civil  government.”
Accepting this premise, most state

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
What were the main
principles of the new
republican religious
regime?

governments indirectly supported churches by exempt-
ing their property and ministers from taxation.

Freedom of conscience also came with sharp cul-
tural limits. In Virginia, Jefferson’s Religious Freedom
act  prohibited  religious  requirements  for  holding
public  office,  but  other  states  discriminated  against
those who were not Protestant Christians. The North
Carolina Constitution of 1776 disqualified from public
office  any  citizen  “who  shall  deny  the  being  of  God,
or the Truth of the Protestant Religion, or the Divine
Authority of the Old or New Testament.” New Hamp-
shire’s  constitution  contained  a  similar  provision
until 1868.

Americans  influenced  by  Enlightenment  deism
and  by  evangelical  Protestantism  condemned  these
religious  restrictions.  Jefferson,  Franklin,  and  other
American intellectuals maintained that God had given
humans the power of reason so that they could deter-
mine  moral  truths  for  themselves.  To  protect  society
from “ecclesiastical tyranny,” they demanded complete
freedom  of  conscience.  The  “truth  is  great  and  will
prevail  if  left  to  herself,”  Jefferson  declared;  “religion
is  a  matter  which  lies  solely  between  man  and  his
God.” Many evangelical Protestants likewise demanded
religious  liberty  to  protect  their  churches  from  an
oppressive government. Isaac Backus, a New England
minister,  warned  Baptists  not  to  incorporate  their
churches  or  accept  public  funds  because  that  might
lead  to  state  control.  In  Connecticut,  a  devout  Con-
gregationalist  welcomed  “voluntarism,”  the  funding
of  churches  by  their  members;  it  allowed  the  laity  to
control the clergy, he said, while also supporting self-
government and “the principles of republicanism.”

Republican  Church  Institutions  Following  inde-
pendence, Americans embraced churches that preached
spiritual equality and governed themselves democrati-
cally  while  ignoring  those  with  hierarchical  and
authoritarian institutions. Preferring Luther’s doctrine
of the priesthood of all believers, few citizens accepted
the authority claimed by Roman Catholic priests and
bishops. Likewise, few Americans joined the Protestant
Episcopal  Church,  the  successor  to  the  Church  of
England,  because  wealthy  lay  members  dominated
many  congregations  and  it,  too,  had  a  hierarchy  of
bishops (Figure 8.1). The Presbyterian Church attracted
more adherents, in part because its churches elected lay
members  to  synods,  the  congresses  that  determined
doctrine and practice.

Evangelical  Methodist  and  Baptist  churches  were
by  far  the  most  successful  institutions  in  attracting
new members, especially from the “unchurched” — the

