CHAPTER 8

  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820

271

Share of all
congregations (%)

1780

1860

17

19

2

30

10

2

20

4

26

5

5

4

42

14

2,000

4,000

6,000

8,000

10,000

12,000

14,000

16,000

18,000

20,000

1780

1860

Anglican/
Episcopalian

Baptist

Catholic

Congregational

Lutheran

Methodist

Presbyterian

406

457

57

742

240

50

495

2,447

1,000

2,100

12,150

2,500

2,200

2,100

20,000

6,400

47,450

FIGURE 8.1
Number of Church Congregations by Denomination, 1780 and 1860

The growth of evangelical churches, Methodist and Baptist, transformed American Christianity
during the ﬁrst half of the nineteenth century. Also noteworthy was the surge in the number
of Roman Catholic congregations, the result of Catholic immigration from Ireland and Germany
after 1830.

great  number  of  irreligious  Americans.  The  Baptists
boasted a thoroughly republican church organization,
with self-governing congregations. Also, Baptists (and
Methodists as well) developed an egalitarian religious
culture  marked  by  communal  singing  and  emotional
services. These denominations formed a dynamic new
force in American religion.

The Second Great Awakening
As  Americans  adopted  new  religious  principles,  a
decades-long  series  of  religious  revivals — the  Second
Great Awakening — made the United States a genuinely
Christian society. Evangelical denominations began the
revival  in  the  1790s,  as  they  spread  their  message  in
seacoast cities and the backcountry of New England. A
new  sect  of  Universalists,  who  repudiated  Calvinism
and  preached  universal  salvation,  also  gained  tens  of
thousands of converts, especially in Massachusetts and
northern New England. After 1800, enthusiastic camp
meetings swept the frontier regions of South Carolina,
Tennessee, Ohio, and Kentucky. The largest gathering, at
Cane Ridge in Kentucky in 1801, lasted for nine electri-
fying  days  and  nights  and  attracted  almost  20,000
people  (Map  8.4).  With  these  revivals,  Baptist  and
Methodist  preachers  reshaped  the  spiritual  landscape
throughout  the  South.  Offering  a  powerful  emotional
message and the promise of religious fellowship, revival-
ists  attracted  both  unchurched  individuals  and  pious
families searching for social ties as they migrated to new
communities (America Compared, p. 272).

A  New  Religious  Landscape  The  Second  Great
Awakening  transformed  the  denominational  makeup
of  American  religion.  The  main  colonial-period
churches — the Congregationalists, Episcopalians, and
Quakers — grew slowly through natural increase, while
Methodist  and  Baptist  churches  expanded  spectacu-
larly by winning converts. In rural areas, their preach-
ers followed a regular circuit, “riding a hardy pony or
horse” with their “Bible, hymn-book, and Discipline”
to  visit  existing  congregations.  They  began  new
churches  by  searching  out  devout  families,  bringing
them  together  for  worship,  and  then  appointing  lay
elders to lead the congregation and enforce moral dis-
cipline. Soon, Baptists and Methodists were the largest
denominations.

To  attract  converts,  evangelical  ministers  copied
the  “practical  preaching”
techniques  of  George
Whitefield  and  other  eighteenth-century  revivalists
(Chapter  4).  They  spoke  from  memory  in  plain  lan-
guage, raised their voice to make important points, and
punctuated  their  words  with  theatrical  gestures.
“Preach without papers,” advised one minister. “[S]eem
earnest  &  serious;  &  you  will  be  listened  to  with
Patience, & Wonder.”

In the South, evangelical religion was initially a dis-
ruptive force because many ministers spoke of spiritual
equality and criticized slavery. Husbands and planters
grew  angry  when  their  wives  became  more  assertive
and when blacks joined evangelical congregations. To
retain  white  men  in  their  churches,  Methodist  and
Baptist  preachers  gradually  adapted  their  religious

