A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Frances Trollope

American Camp

Meetings and English

Church Hierarchies

Frances Trollope, a successful English author and the mother of novelist Anthony
Trollope, lived for a time in Cincinnati. She won great acclaim as the author of a
critical-minded study, Domestic Manners of the Americans (1832), a best-seller in
Europe and the United States.

I found the opportunity I had long wished for, of attend-
ing a camp-meeting, . . . in a wild district on the confines
of Indiana. . . .

One of the preachers began in a low nasal tone, and,
like all other Methodist preachers, assured us of the enor-
mous depravity of man as he comes from the hands of
his Maker, and of his perfect sanctification after he had
wrestled sufficiently with the Lord. . . . The admiration
of the crowd was evinced by almost constant cries of
“Amen! Amen!” “Jesus! Jesus!” “Glory! Glory!” and the
like. . . . [T]he preacher told them that “this night was
the time fixed upon for anxious sinners to wrestle with
the Lord” . . . and that such as needed their help were to
come forward. . . .

[A]bove a hundred persons, nearly all females, came

forward, uttering howlings and groans, so terrible that
I shall never cease to shudder when I recall them. They
appeared to drag each other forward, and on the word
being given, “let us pray,” they all fell on their knees; but
this posture was soon changed for others that permitted
greater scope for the convulsive movements of their
limbs. . . .

Many of these wretched creatures were beautiful
young females. The preachers moved about among them,
at once exciting and soothing their agonies. . . . I watched
their tormentors breathing into their ears consolations
that tinged the pale cheek with red. Had I been a man,
I am sure I should have been guilty of some rash act of
interference; nor do I believe that such a scene could have
been acted in the presence of Englishmen, without instant
punishment being inflicted . . . to check so turbulent and
vicious a scene.

* *

  **

  **

The critics who have from time to time reproached
me with undue severity in my strictures on the domestic
manners of the Americans have said that a candid exami-
nation of matters at home would have shown me that
what I reprobated might be found in England, as well
as in the United States. In most cases I have felt that this
might be rebutted . . . by showing that what I complained
of in the Union as indicative of imperfect civilisation,
[whereas] if existing at all with us, could only be met
with among persons in a much lower station of life. . . .
But on the subject treated in the present chapter, jus-
tice compels me to avow that no such pleading can avail
me. That such fearful profanation of the holy name of reli-
gion has rapidly increased among us since the year 1827,
in which I quitted England for America, is most sadly
certain. . . . [Yet, the bishops of the Church of England
protect us from many excesses, while in America the lack
of an established] national church, and of that guardian
protection which its episcopal authority seems to promise
against its desecration by the ever-varying innovations of
sectarian licence, appeared to account for all the profana-
tions I witnessed.

Source: Frances Trollope, Domestic Manners of the Americans (London: Whittaker,
Treacher, 1832), 139, 142–144; the material following the asterisks comes from ibid.,
5th ed. (London: R. Bentley, 1839), chapter 8.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  According to Trollope, what accounts for the frequency of
“profane” religious services in America and their relative
absence in England?

2.  How does Trollope use “social class” to analyze the differ-

ences between England and America?

message to justify the authority of yeomen patriarchs
and slave-owning planters. Man was naturally at “the
head  of  the  woman,”  declared  one  Baptist  minister,
while a Methodist conference told Christian slaves to
be “submissive, faithful, and obedient.”

Black  Christianity  Other  evangelists  persuaded
planters to spread Protestant Christianity among their
African  American  slaves.  During  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury,  most  blacks  had  maintained  the  religious  prac-
tices  of  their  African  homelands,  giving  homage  to

272

