MAP 8.4
The Second Great Awakening,
1790–1860

The Second Great Awakening lasted
for decades and invigorated churches
in every part of the nation. The
revivals in Kentucky and New York
State were particularly inﬂuential. As
thousands of farm families migrated
to the West, they carried with them
the religious excitement generated by
the Cane Ridge revival in Kentucky in
1801. And, between 1825 and 1835,
the area along the Erie Canal in New
York witnessed such fervor that it
came to be known as the Burned-
over District.

CHAPTER 8

  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820

273

N

W

E

S

C A N A D A

L. Superior

In the 1820s an intense wave of revivals
ignited religious fervor in communities
along the Erie Canal, and this region became
known as the “burned-over district.”

VT.
(1791)

MAINE
(1820)

MICHIGAN
TERRITORY

Mississip

pi
R
.

    L. Huro

n

n
a
g
i
h
c
i

M
.
L

N.Y.

N.H.

Andover

Andover
Seminary
MASS.

Erie Canal

New
Haven

R.I.

CONN.

Yale
College

N.J.

L. Erie

PA.

As devout farmers moved west,
they established new Protestant
churches throughout the Upper
South and Midwest.

ILLINOIS
(1818)

INDIANA
(1816)

Missouri R.

Muddy
River
Red River

Gasper
River

TENNESSEE
(1796)

Student revivals at Yale College and
Andover Seminary around 1800 led
to the expansion of Protestant missions
in the West and also in Africa, India,
and Hawaii.  Societies supporting the
missions combined into the American
Home Missionary Society in 1826.

VA.

OHIO
(1803)

hio R.

O

Cane
Ridge

KY.
(1792)

NORTH
CAROLINA

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

Paths of settlement, 1790–1830
Camp meeting, 1801
Kentucky revival
New York’s “burned-over district”
Paths of revival

The Second Great Awakening started in the 1790s as Baptists,
Methodists, and a new sect called Universalists proselytized in
New England.  After 1800 the Awakening continued in Kentucky
in camp meetings of pioneer farmers, who carried evangelical
religion back to their communities.

0

0

125

250 miles

125

250 kilometers

African  gods  and  spirits  or  practicing  Islam.  “At  the
time I first went to Carolina,” remembered former slave
Charles Ball, “there were a great many African slaves in
the  country. . . . Many  of  them  believed  there  were
several  gods  [and]  I  knew  several . . . Mohamedans.”
Beginning  in  the  mid-1780s,  Baptist  and  Methodist
preachers  converted  hundreds  of  African  Americans
along the James River in Virginia and throughout the
Chesapeake and the Carolinas.

Subsequently, black Christians adapted Protestant
teachings to their own needs. They generally ignored
the doctrines of original sin and Calvinist predestina-
tion as well as biblical passages that prescribed unthink-
ing  obedience  to  authority.  Some  African  American
converts  envisioned  the  Christian  God  as  a  warrior
who had liberated the Jews. Their own “cause was sim-
ilar to the Israelites,” preacher Martin Prosser told his
fellow  slaves  as  he  and  his  brother  Gabriel  plotted
rebellion in Virginia in 1800. “I have read in my Bible
where  God  says,  if  we  worship  him, . . . five  of  you
shall  conquer  a  hundred  and  a  hundred  of  you  a
hundred thousand of our enemies.” Confident of a spe-
cial  relationship  with  God,  Christian  slaves  prepared

themselves spiritually for emanci-
pation, the first step in their jour-
ney to the Promised Land.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did evangelical and
African American churches
differ from other Protes-
tant denominations?

Religion and Reform
Many  whites  also  rejected  the
Calvinists’  emphasis  on  human  depravity  and  weak-
ness;  instead,  they  celebrated  human  reason  and  free
will. In New England, educated Congregationalists dis-
carded the mysterious concept of the Trinity — Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit — and, taking the name Unitarians,
worshipped  a  “united”  God  and  promoted  rational
thought.  “The ultimate  reliance  of  a  human  being  is,
and must be, on his own mind,” argued William Ellery
Channing,  a  famous  Unitarian  minister.  A  children’s
catechism  conveyed  the  denomination’s  optimistic
message: “If I am good, God will love me, and make me
happy.”

Other  New  England  Congregationalists  softened
Calvinist  doctrines.  Lyman  Beecher,  the  preeminent
Congregationalist clergyman, accepted the traditional
Christian belief that people had a natural tendency to

