274

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

Women in the Awakening

The Second Great Awakening was a pivotal moment in the history of American women. In this detail
from Religious Camp Meeting, painted by J. Maze Burbank in 1839, male preachers inspire religious
frenzy, mostly among young women. In fact, most women embraced evangelical Christianity in a calm
and measured manner, becoming dedicated workers, teachers, and morality-minded mothers. When
tens of thousands of these women also joined movements for temperance, abolition, and women’s rights,
they spurred a great wave of social reform. Old Dartmouth Historical Society/New Bedford Whaling Museum.

sin;  but,  rejecting  predestination,  he  affirmed  the
capacity  of  all  men  and  women  to  choose  God.  By
embracing  the  doctrine  of  free  will,  Beecher — along
with  “Free  Will”  Baptists — testified  to  the  growing
belief that people could shape their destiny.

Reflecting  this  optimism,  the  Reverend  Samuel
Hopkins linked individual salvation to religious benev-
olence — the  practice  of  disinterested  virtue.  As  the
Presbyterian  minister  John  Rodgers  explained,  fortu-
nate  individuals  who  had  received  God’s  grace  or
bounty had a duty “to dole out charity to their poorer
brothers  and  sisters.”  Heeding  this  message,  pious

merchants  in  New  York  City  founded  the  Humane
Society  and  other  charitable  organizations.  Devout
women aided their ministers by holding prayer meet-
ings  and  distributing  charity.  By  the  1820s,  so  many
Protestant men and women had embraced benevolent
reform that conservative church leaders warned them
not to neglect spiritual matters. Still, improving society
was a key element of the new religious sensibility. The
mark of a true church, declared the devout Christian
social reformer Lydia Maria Child, is when members’
“heads and hearts unite in working for the welfare of
the human-race.”

