By  the  1820s,  many  Protestant  Christians  had
embraced that goal. Unlike the First Great Awakening,
which split churches into warring factions, the Second
Great Awakening fostered cooperation among denom-
inations.  Religious  leaders  founded  five  interdenomi-
national  societies:  the  American  Education  Society
(1815),  the  Bible  Society  (1816),  the  Sunday  School
Union (1824), the Tract Society (1825), and the Home
Missionary  Society  (1826).  Based  in  eastern  cities —
New York, Boston, and Philadelphia — these societies
dispatched hundreds of missionaries to the West and
distributed thousands of religious pamphlets.

Increasingly, American Protestants saw themselves
as a movement that could change the course of history.
“I want to see our state evangelized,” declared a church-
goer  near  the  Erie  Canal:  “Suppose  the  great  State  of
New York in all its physical, political, moral, commer-
cial, and pecuniary resources should come over to the
Lord’s side. Why it would turn the scale and could con-
vert the world. I shall have no rest until it is done.”

Because the Second Great Awakening aroused such
enthusiasm,  religion  became  an  important  new  force
in  political  life.  On  July  4,  1827,  the  Reverend  Ezra
Stiles  Ely  called  on  the  Philadelphia  Presbyterians  to
begin a “Christian party in politics.” Ely’s sermon, “The
Duty of Christian Freemen to Elect Christian Rulers,”
proclaimed a religious agenda for the American repub-
lic that Thomas Jefferson and John Adams would have
found  strange  and  troubling.  The  two  founders  had
gone  to  their  graves  the  previous  year  believing  that
America’s mission was to spread political republican-
ism. In contrast, Ely urged the United States to become
an evangelical Christian nation dedicated to religious
conversion at home and abroad: “All our rulers ought
in their official capacity to serve the Lord Jesus Christ.”
Evangelical Christians would issue similar calls during
the  Third  (1880–1900)  and  Fourth  (1970–present)
Great Awakenings.

Women’s New Religious Roles
The  upsurge  in  religious  enthusiasm  allowed  women
to  demonstrate  their  piety  and  even  to  found  new
sects. Mother Ann Lee organized the Shakers in Britain
and in 1774 migrated to America, where she attracted
numerous recruits; by the 1820s, Shaker communities
dotted the American countryside from New Hampshire
to Indiana. Jemima Wilkinson, a young Quaker woman
in Rhode Island, found inspiration by reading George
Whitefield’s sermons. After experiencing a vision that

CHAPTER 8

  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820

275

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How was the Second Great
Awakening similar to, and
different from, the First
Great Awakening of the
1740s (Chapter 4)?

she  had  died  and  been  reincar-
as  Christ,  Wilkinson
nated
the  “Publick
declared  herself
Universal  Friend,”  dressed
in
masculine  attire,  and  preached
a  new  gospel.  Her  teachings
blended  the  Calvinist  warning
of  “a  lost  and  guilty,  gossiping,
dying  World’’  with  Quaker-inspired  plain  dress,
pacifism, and abolitionism. Wilkinson’s charisma ini-
tially won scores of converts, but her radical lifestyle
and ambiguous gender aroused hostility, and her sect
dwindled away.

A Growing Public Presence  Female-led sects had
far  less  impact  than  thousands  of  women  in  main-
stream  churches.  For  example,  women  in  New
Hampshire  churches  managed  more  than  fifty  local

Mrs. Juliann Jane Tillman, 1844

In 1837, Mrs. Tillman explained in a newspaper article that
she “was strangely wrought upon” and “went to God” for
help. Soon, “what seemed to be an angel made his sudden
appearance, and in his hand was a roll . . . on which was
written, ‘Thee I have chosen to preach my gospel without
delay.’” After much anguish and more supernatural visita-
tions, Mrs. Tillman overcame strong personal doubts — and
the equally strong opposition of male ministers and
laity — and began to preach in the African Methodist
Episcopal Church. Library of Congress.

