276

PART 3

  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

“cent”  societies  to  raise  funds  for  the  Society  for
Promoting  Christian  Knowledge,  New  York  City
women  founded  the  Society  for  the  Relief  of  Poor
Widows,  and  young  Quaker  women  in  Philadelphia
ran  the  Society  for  the  Free  Instruction  of  African
Females.

Women  took  charge  of  religious  and  charitable
enterprises because of their exclusion from other pub-
lic  roles  and  because  of  their  numbers.  After  1800,
more than 70 percent of the members of New England
Congregational churches were women. The predomi-
nance  of  women  prompted  Congregational  ministers
to end traditional gender-segregated prayer meetings,
and  evangelical  Methodist  and  Baptist  preachers
actively  promoted  mixed-sex  praying.  “Our  prayer
meetings  have  been  one  of  the  greatest  means  of  the
conversion  of  souls,”  a  minister  in  central  New  York
reported in the 1820s, “especially those in which broth-
ers and sisters have prayed together.”

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Why did Protestant Chris-
tianity and Protestant
women emerge as forces
for social change?

Far  from  leading  to  sexual  promiscuity,  as  critics
feared, mixing men and women in religious activities
promoted  greater  self-discipline.  Believing  in  female
virtue,  young  women  and  the
men  who  courted  them  post-
poned  sexual  intercourse  until
after  marriage — previously
a
much rarer form of self-restraint.
In  Hingham,  Massachusetts,  and
many other New England towns,
more  than  30  percent  of  the  women  who  married
between  1750  and  1800  bore  a  child  within  eight
months of their wedding day; by the 1820s, the rate had
dropped to 15 percent.

As women claimed spiritual authority, men tried to
curb  their  power.  In  both  the  North  and  the  South,
evangelical Baptist churches that had once advocated
spiritual  equality  now  prevented  women  from  voting
on  church  matters  or  offering  public  testimonies  of
faith.  Testimonies  by  women,  one  layman  declared,
were  “directly  opposite  to  the  apostolic  command  in
[Corinthians]  xiv,  34,  35,  ‘Let  your  women  learn  to
keep silence in the churches.’ ” Another man claimed,
“Women have a different calling. That they be chaste,
keepers at home is the Apostle’s direction.” Such injunc-
tions  merely  changed  the  focus  of  women’s  religious
activism.  Embracing  the  idea  of  republican  mother-
hood, Christian women throughout the United States
founded  maternal  associations  to  encourage  proper
child  rearing.  By  the  1820s,  Mother’s  Magazine  and
other  newsletters,  widely  read  in  hundreds  of  small

towns  and  villages,  were  giving  women  a  sense  of
shared identity and purpose.

Religious activism also advanced female education,
as churches sponsored academies where girls from the
middling  classes  received  intellectual  and  moral
instruction.  Emma  Willard,  the  first  American  advo-
cate  of  higher  education  for  women,  opened  the
Middlebury Female Seminary in Vermont in 1814 and
later founded girls’ academies in Waterford and Troy,
New York. Beginning in the 1820s, women educated in
these  seminaries  and  academies  displaced  men  as
public-school teachers, in part because they accepted
lower  pay  than  men  would.  Female  schoolteachers
earned  from  $12  to  $14  a  month  with  room  and
board — less than a farm laborer. However, as school-
teachers, women had an acknowledged place in public
life — a  status  that  previously  had  been  beyond  their
reach. Just as the ideology of democratic republicanism
had expanded voting rights and the political influence
of ordinary white men in the North, so the values of
Christian  republicanism  had  bolstered  the  public
authority of middling women.

The  Second  Great  Awakening  made  Americans  a
fervently  Protestant  people.  Along  with  the  values  of
republicanism  and  capitalism,  this  religious  impulse
formed the core of an emerging national identity.

SUMMARY
Like all important ideologies, republicanism has many
facets. We  have explored three of them in this chapter.
We  saw  how  state  legislatures  used  government-
granted  charters  and  monopolies  to  support  private
businesses,  with  the  goal  of  enhancing  the  common-
wealth of society. This republican-inspired “common-
wealth”  policy  of  state  mercantilism  remained
dominant until the 1840s, when classical liberal doc-
trines partially replaced it.

We also saw how republicanism influenced social
and  family  values.  The  principle  of  legal  equality
encouraged  social  mobility  among  white  men  and
prompted men and women to seek companionate mar-
riages. Republicanism likewise encouraged parents to
provide their children with equal inheritances and to
allow  them  to  choose  their  marriage partners.  In  the
South,  republican  doctrines  of  liberty  and  equality
coexisted  uneasily  with  racial  slavery  and  class  divi-
sions, and ultimately they benefitted only a minority of
the white population.

