CHAPTER 8

  CHAPTER REVIEW

277

Finally,  we  observed  the  complex  interaction  of
republicanism and religion. Stirred by republican prin-
ciples, many citizens joined democratic and egalitarian
denominations,  particularly  Methodist  and  Baptist
churches.  Inspired  by  “benevolent”  ideas  and  the
enthusiastic preachers of the Second Great Awakening,

many women devoted their energies to religious pur-
poses and social reform organizations. The result of all
these initiatives — in economic policy, social relations,
and religious institutions — was the creation of a dis-
tinctive American republican culture.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

“neomercantilist” (p. 250)
Panic of 1819 (p. 251)
Commonwealth System (p. 256)
sentimentalism (p. 258)
companionate marriages (p. 258)
demographic transition (p. 259)
republican motherhood (p. 259)
manumission (p. 265)

herrenvolk republic (p. 266)
American Colonization Society

(p. 267)

Missouri Compromise (p. 269)
established church (p. 270)
voluntarism (p. 270)
“unchurched” (p. 270)
Second Great Awakening (p. 271)

Key People

John Jacob Astor (p. 250)
Benjamin Rush (p. 259)
Henry Clay (p. 267)
Richard Allen (p. 267)
Lyman Beecher (p. 273)
Emma Willard (p. 276)

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  How  important  were  the  regional  differences  in
the  social  aspects  of  republicanism,  given  the
national scope of other republican-inspired devel-
opments  such  as  state  mercantilism  and  religious
revivalism?

2.  Trace the relationship between America’s republi-
can culture and the surge of evangelism called the
Second  Great  Awakening.  In  what  ways  are  the
goals of the two movements similar? How are they
different?

3.  In what ways did women’s private and public lives
change  during  the  years  between  1790  and  1820,

and  what  were  the  motive  forces  behind  those
changes?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events
listed  under  “Work,  Exchange,  and
Technology,”  “Ideas,  Beliefs,  and  Culture,”  and
“Identity”  on  the  thematic  timeline  on  page  149.
How did the emerging economic and social order
of early-nineteenth-century America represent an
advance upon, or a retreat from, the republican ide-
ology  articulated  during  the  decades  of  the  inde-
pendence struggle?

