278

PART 3

  CHAPTER REVIEW

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  The text argues
that  a  distinct  American  identity  had  begun  to
emerge  by  1820.  How  would  you  describe  this
identity,  and  how  did  it  differ  from  the  sense  of
identity in the American mainland colonies in 1750
(Chapter  4)?  What  forces  might  account  for  the
changes?

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  The  painting  of  “Repub-
lican Families . . . and Servants” (p. 264) addresses
many of the themes of this chapter. What are those
themes,  and  what  position  does  the  artist  take  in
presenting them?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Nancy Cott, Public Vows: A History of Marriage and
the Nation (2000). Analyzes the cultural and legal
aspects of marriage.

Jan Lewis, The Pursuit of Happiness (1983). Discusses
the paternalistic slave-owning gentry of the Upper
South.

Jeffrey L. Pasley et al., eds., Beyond the Founders
(2004). Shows how ordinary citizens promoted a
democratic polity.

Randolph Ferguson Scully, Religion and the Making of
Nat Turner’s Virginia (2008). Links the rise of evan-
gelical Christianity in the South to the slave revolt led
by Nat Turner.

Bernard Weisberger, They Gathered at the River
(1958). A classic study of the revivalists who led
America’s Great Awakenings.

Rosemarie Zagarri, Revolutionary Backlash (2007).
Demonstrates the limited inclusion of women in
politics.

