Overlapping
Revolutions
1800–1860

“The procession was nearly a mile long . . . [and] the democrats marched

in good order to the glare of torches,” a French visitor remarked in amaze-

ment during the U.S. presidential election of 1832. “These scenes belong

to history . . . the wondrous epic of the coming of democracy.” As Part 4

shows, Americans were making history in many ways between 1800 and

1860. Indeed, these decades constitute a distinct period precisely because

the  pace  of  historical  change  accelerated,  especially  between  1820  and

1860, as overlapping revolutions transformed American life. One revolu-

tion was political: the creation of a genuinely democratic polity. A second

was  economic:  in  1800,  the  United  States  was  predominantly  an  agri-

cultural nation; by 1860, the northern states boasted one of the world’s

foremost industrial economies. Third, these years witnessed far-reaching

cultural  changes.  Beginning  about  1800,  the  Second  Great  Awakening

swept across the nation, sparking great movements of social reform and

intellectual ferment that revolutionized the culture of the North and Mid-

west. Finally, sectionalism increased in intensity, as the South extended its

slave-labor  system  and  the  North  developed  a  free-labor  society.  The

overall  result  by  1860  was  striking  and  alarming:  now  more  politically

democratic,  economically  prosperous,  and  deeply  religious,  the  United

States stood divided into antagonistic sections. Here, in brief, are the key

aspects of those transformations.

4P A R T

C H A P T E R 9
Transforming the
Economy, 1800–1860

C H A P T E R 10
A Democratic
Revolution, 1800–1844

C H A P T E R 11
Religion and Reform,
1800–1860

C H A P T E R 12
The South Expands:
Slavery and Society,
1800–1860

280

