Transforming the Economy,
Society, and Culture

Impressive advances in industrial production, trans-
portation, and commerce transformed the nation’s
economy. Factory owners used water- and steam-
powered machines and a new system of labor discipline
to boost the output of goods. Manufacturers produced
5 percent of the country’s wealth in 1820 but nearly 25
percent by 1860. As enterprising merchants, entrepre-
neurs, and government ofﬁcials developed a network
of canals and markets, manufacturers sold these
products throughout an expanding nation. The new
economy created a class-based, urban society in the
North and Midwest. A wealthy elite of merchants,
manufacturers, bankers, and entrepreneurs rose to
the top of the society. To preserve social stability,
this elite embraced benevolent reform, preaching
the gospel of temperance, Sunday observance, and
universal elementary education. Simultaneously, an
expanding urban middle class created a distinct mate-
rial and religious culture and promoted its ideology
of individual responsibility and social mobility. Some
middle-class Americans advocated radical causes:
joining utopian socialist communities and demanding
equal rights for women and the immediate end of
racial slavery. A mass of propertyless wage-earning
workers, including poor immigrants from Germany
and Ireland, devised a vibrant popular culture of their
own. This complex story of economic change and
social fragmentation is the focus of Chapter 9 and
Chapter 11.

Creating a Democratic Polity

Beginning in the 1810s, the rapid expansion of white
male suffrage and political parties created a competi-
tive and responsive democratic polity. Pressure came
from ordinary citizens who organized political move-
ments, such as the Anti-Masonic, Working Men’s, and
Liberty parties, to advance their interests and beliefs.
Farmers, workers, and entrepreneurs persuaded state
legislatures to improve transportation, shorten work-
days, and award valuable charters to banks and
business corporations. Catholic immigrants from
Ireland and Germany entered the political arena to
protect their cultural habits and religious institutions
from restrictive legislation advocated by Protestant
nativists and reformers. Then, during the 1830s,
Andrew Jackson and the Democratic Party led a
political and constitutional revolution that cut
federal and state government aid to ﬁnanciers,
merchants, and corporations. To contend with the
Democrats, the Whig Party devised a competing
program that stressed state-sponsored economic
development, moral reform, and individual social
mobility. This party competition engaged the ener-
gies of the electorate, helped to unify a fragmented
social order, and, during the 1830s and 1840s, less-
ened sectional tensions. Chapters 10 and 12 analyze
this story of political change and party politics.

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

281

