Overlapping
Revolutions
1800–1860

Growing Sectional Divisions

Thematic Understanding

This timeline arranges some of the impor-

tant events of this period into themes. Look at

the entries under “Identity”: what identities

emerged in this period, and which issues

shaped these developments? In the “Work,

Exchange, and Technology” theme, how did

industrial output and the transportation

system change over time?  >

However, the party system could not overcome the
increasingly sharp sectional divisions. As the North
developed into an urban industrial society based on
free labor, the South increasingly defended white
supremacy and slavery as a “positive good” and
expanded its plantation-based agricultural society.
Beginning in the 1820s, the two sections had differed
over economic issues and Indian policy. Georgia and
other southeastern states demanded and won — over
the objections of northeastern reformers — the Indian
Removal Act of 1830, which resettled native peoples
west of the Mississippi River. Concurrently, between
1816 and 1832, northern manufacturers, workers,
and farmers won high protective tariffs, which
southern planters bitterly opposed. Eventually, party
politicians negotiated a compromise, with the North
accepting tariff reductions. The sections had clashed
again over the expansion of slavery, into Missouri and
the Louisiana Purchase in the 1820s and into Texas
and the Southwest in the 1840s, and political leaders
again devised compromises. However, by the 1850s,
slavery — and the social system it symbolized —
increasingly divided the nation. Moreover, because
the democratic political revolution had engaged the
passions of millions of ordinary Americans, the politi-
cal system had become more volatile and resistant to
compromise. Chapters 10 and 12 explain how national
expansion led to increasing sectional struggle.

282

