Transforming the Economy
1800–1860

In  1804,  life  turned  grim  for  eleven-

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
What  were  the  causes  and  conse-
quences  of  the  Industrial  and  Mar-
ket  revolutions,  and  how  did  they
change the way ordinary Americans
lived?

year-old  Chauncey  Jerome.  His  father
died suddenly, and Jerome became an
indentured servant on a Connecticut farm.
Quickly learning that few farmers “would
treat  a  poor  boy  like  a  human  being,”
Jerome bought out his indenture by mak-
ing dials for clocks and then found a job with clockmaker Eli Terry. A manufacturing
wizard, Terry used water power to drive precision saws and woodworking lathes. Soon
his  shop,  and  dozens  of  outworkers,  were  turning  out  thousands  of  tall  clocks  with
wooden works. Then, in 1816, Terry patented an enormously popular desk clock with
brass  parts,  an  innovation that turned Waterbury, Connecticut, into the clockmaking
center of the United States.

In 1822, Chauncey Jerome set up his own clock factory. By organizing work more
efﬁciently and using new machines that stamped out interchangeable metal parts, he
drove down the price of a simple clock from $20 to $5 and then to less than $2. By the
1840s, Jerome was selling his clocks in England, the hub of the Industrial Revolution; a
decade later, his workers were turning out 400,000 clocks a year, clear testimony to
American  industrial  enterprise.  By  1860,  the  United  States  was  not  only  the  world’s
leading exporter of cotton and wheat but also the third-ranked manufacturing nation
behind Britain and France.

“Business is the very soul of an American: the fountain of all human felicity,” author
Francis Grund observed shortly after arriving from Europe. “It is as if all America were
but one gigantic workshop, over the entrance of which there is the blazing inscription,
‘No admission here, except on business.’ ” Stimulated by the entrepreneurial culture of
early-nineteenth-century America, thousands of artisan-inventors like Chauncey Jerome
propelled the country into the Industrial Revolution, a new system of production based
on water and steam power and machine technology. Simultaneously, thousands of trad-
ers  fashioned  a  second  great  economic  advance,  a  Market  Revolution  that  exploited
advances in transportation and business organization to expand trade in farm products
and manufactured goods.

Not all Americans embraced the new business-dominated society, and many failed
to  share  in  the  new  prosperity.  Moreover,  the  increase  in  manufacturing,  commerce,
and ﬁnance created class divisions that challenged the founders’ vision of an agricultural
republic  with  few  distinctions  of  wealth.  As  the  philosopher  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson
warned in 1839: “The invasion of Nature by Trade with its Money, its Credit, its Steam,
[and] its Railroad threatens to . . . establish a new, universal Monarchy.”

9

C H A P T E R

THE AMERICAN
INDUSTRIAL
REVOLUTION

The Division of Labor and the

Factory

The Textile Industry and British

Competition

American Mechanics and

Technological Innovation

Wageworkers and the Labor

Movement

THE MARKET
REVOLUTION

The Transportation Revolution

Forges Regional Ties

The Growth of Cities and Towns

NEW SOCIAL CLASSES
AND CULTURES
The Business Elite

The Middle Class

Urban Workers and the Poor

The Benevolent Empire

Charles Grandison Finney:
Revivalism and Reform

Immigration and Cultural

Conflict

284

