286

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

The American Industrial
Revolution
The  Industrial  Revolution  came  to  the  United  States
between 1790 and 1860, as merchants and manufactur-
ers  reorganized  work  routines,  built  factories,  and
exploited a wide range of natural resources. As output
increased,  goods  that  once  had  been  luxury  items
became  part  of  everyday  life  (Figure  9.1).  The  rapid
construction of turnpikes, canals, and railroads by state
governments  and  private  entrepreneurs,  working
together  in  the  Commonwealth  System  (Chapter  8),
distributed manufactures throughout the nation.

The Division of Labor and the Factory
Increased  output  stemmed  initially  from  changes  in
the organization of work that turned independent arti-
sans  into  wage  laborers.  Traditionally,  New  England
shoemakers  had  turned  leather
hides  into  finished  shoes  and
boots  in  small  wooden  shacks
called  “ten-footers,”  where  they
worked at their own pace. During
the  1820s  and  1830s,  merchants
in Lynn, Massachusetts, destroyed
the businesses of these artisans by introducing an out-
work  system  and  a  division  of  labor.  The  merchants

IDENTIFY CAUSES
How did the division of
labor increase output,
and what was its impact
on workers?

hired semiskilled journeymen and set them up in large
shops cutting leather into soles and uppers. They sent
out  the  upper  sections  to  rural  Massachusetts  towns,
where  women  binders  sewed  in  fabric  linings.  The
manufacturers then had other journeymen attach the
uppers to the soles and return the shoes to the central
shop for inspection, packing, and sale. This more effi-
cient  system  increased  output  and  cut  the  price  of
shoes and boots, even as it turned employers into pow-
erful  “shoe  bosses”  and  eroded  workers’  wages  and
independence.

For  products  not  suited  to  the  outwork  system,
manufacturers created the modern factory, which con-
centrated production under one roof. For example, in
the 1830s, Cincinnati merchants built large slaughter-
houses that processed thousands of hogs every month.
The  technology  remained  simple,  but  a  division  of
labor increased output. As a system of overhead rails
moved  the  hog  carcasses  along  a  “disassembly”  line,
one  worker  split  the  animals,  another  removed  the
organs, and others trimmed the carcasses into pieces.
Packers then stuffed the pork into barrels and salted it
to prevent spoilage. Reported landscape architect and
journalist Frederick Law Olmsted:

We  entered  an  immense  low-ceiling  room  and
followed  a  vista  of  dead  swine,  upon  their  backs,
their paws stretching mutely toward heaven. Walking
down to the vanishing point, we found there a sort
of  human  chopping-machine  where  the  hogs  were

Item

Cotton textiles

Lumber

Boots and shoes

Flour and meal

Men’s clothing

Iron (cast, forged, etc.)

Machinery

Woolen goods

Leather

Liquors

Value added by
manufacture
(in millions)

Product value
(millions)

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

$54.7

$53.8

$49.2

$40.1

$36.7

$35.7

$32.5

$25.0

$22.8

10.

$22.5

$107.3

$104.9

$91.9

$248.6

$80.8

$73.1

$52.0

$60.7

$67.3

$56.6

Number
of workers

115,000

75,600

123,000

27,700

Value
added per
worker

8.

$475

6.

$710

9.

$400

2.

$1,450

114,800

10.

$320

49,000

41,200

40,600

22,700

12,700

5.

$730

4.

$790

7.

$615

3.

$1,005

1.

$1,770

FIGURE 9.1
Leading Branches of Manufacture, 1860

This chart shows clearly that in 1860, three industries — boots and shoes, cotton textiles, and
men’s clothing — each employed more than 100,000 workers. However, the workers in three
other industries had the highest productivity, with each worker adding more than $1,000 in
value to the ﬁnished goods. What were these industries? Why were their workers more pro-
ductive? Adapted from Douglass C. North, Growth and Welfare in the American Past, Second Edition. Copyright
© 1974. Reprinted with permission of the author.

