converted into commercial pork. . . . Plump falls the
hog  upon  the  table,  chop,  chop;  chop,  chop;  chop,
chop, fall the cleavers. . . . We took out our watches
and  counted  thirty-five  seconds,  from  the  moment
when  one  hog  touched  the  table  until  the  next
occupied its place.

The  Cincinnati  system  was  so  efficient — processing
sixty  hogs  an  hour — that  by  the  1840s  the  city  was
known as “Porkopolis.” By 1850, factories were slaugh-
tering 334,000 hogs a year, and 400,000 by 1860.

Other  factories  boasted  impressive  new  technol-
ogy. In 1782, Oliver Evans, a prolific Delaware inven-
tor, built a highly automated flour mill driven by water
power. His machinery lifted the wheat to the top of the
mill, cleaned the grain as it fell into hoppers, ground it
into flour, and then cooled the flour as it was funneled
into  barrels.  Evans’s  factory,  remarked  one  observer,
“was  as  full  of  machinery  as  the  case  of  a  watch.”  It
needed only six men to mill 100,000 bushels of wheat a
year — perhaps ten times as much as they could grind
in a traditional mill.

By the 1830s, a  new “mineral-based  economy” of
coal  and  metal  began  to  emerge.  Manufacturers
increasingly  ran  their  machinery  with  coal-burning
stationary steam engines rather than with water power.
And they now fabricated metal products — iron, brass,
copper, and tinplate (tin-coated rolled iron) — as well
as  pork,  leather,  wool,  cotton,  and  other  agricultural
goods.  In  Chicago,  Cyrus  McCormick  used  steam-
driven machines to make parts for farm reapers, which
workers  assembled  on  a  conveyor  belt.  In  Hartford,
Connecticut,  Samuel  Colt  built  an  assembly  line  to
produce his invention, the six-shooter revolver. Other
New  England  artisans  designed  machines  that  fabri-
cated tinplate into pails, pans, pots, and dozens of other
inexpensive  and  useful  household
items.  These
advances  in  technology  and  factory  organization
alarmed British observers: “The contriving and mak-
ing  of  machinery  has  become  so  common  in  this
country . . . [that] it is to be feared that American man-
ufacturers  will  become  exporters  not  only  to  foreign
countries, but even to England.”

The Textile Industry and
British Competition
To protect the British textile industry from American
competition,  the  British  government  prohibited  the
export  of  textile  machinery  and  the  emigration  of
mechanics  (skilled  craftsmen  who
invented  and
improved tools for industry). Lured by the prospect of
higher wages, though, thousands of British mechanics

CHAPTER 9

  Transforming the Economy, 1800–1860

287

disguised  themselves  as  laborers  and  sailed  to  the
United States. By 1812, at  least three hundred British
mechanics worked in the Philadelphia area alone.

Samuel  Slater,

important  émigré
the  most
mechanic, came to America in 1789 after working for
Richard  Arkwright,  who  had  invented  the  most
advanced  British  machinery  for  spinning  cotton.  A
year  later,  Slater  reproduced  Arkwright’s  innovations
in merchant Moses Brown’s cotton mill in Providence,
Rhode Island.

In competing with British mills, American manu-
facturers had the advantage of an abundance of natural
resources. The nation’s farmers produced huge amounts
of cotton and wool, and the fast-flowing rivers that cas-
caded  down  from  the  Appalachian  foothills  to  the
Atlantic  coastal  plain  provided  a  cheap  source  of
energy. From Massachusetts to Delaware, these water-
ways were soon lined with industrial villages and tex-
tile mills as large as 150 feet long, 40 feet wide, and four
stories high (Map 9.1).

American  and  British  Advantages  Still,  British
producers  easily  undersold  their  American  competi-
tors.  Thanks  to  cheap  transatlantic  shipping  and  low
interest rates in Britain, they could import raw cotton
from the United States, manufacture it into cloth, and
sell  it  in  America  at  a  bargain  price.  (As  they  did  in
India; see America Compared p. 289.) The most impor-
tant British advantage was cheap labor: Britain had a
larger  population — about  12.6  million  in  1810  com-
pared  to  7.3  million  Americans — and  thousands  of
landless laborers prepared to accept low-paying factory
jobs.  To  offset  these  advantages,  American  entrepre-
neurs relied on help from the federal government: in
1816, 1824, and 1828, Congress passed tariff bills that
taxed imported cotton and woolen cloth. However, in
the 1830s, Congress reduced tariffs because southern
planters,  western  farmers,  and  urban  consumers
demanded inexpensive imports.

Better  Machines,  Cheaper  Workers  American
producers  used  two  other  strategies  to  compete  with
their  British  rivals.  First,  they  improved  on  British
technology.  In  1811,  Francis  Cabot  Lowell,  a  wealthy
Boston merchant, toured British textile mills, secretly
making detailed drawings of their
power machinery. Paul Moody, an
experienced American mechanic,
then  copied  the  machines  and
improved  their  design.  In  1814,
Lowell
joined  with  merchants
Nathan  Appleton  and  Patrick

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
What were the advantages
and strategies of British
and American textile
manufacturers?

