288

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

L. Superior

C A N A D A

WISCONSIN
TERRITORY

IOWA
TERRITORY

n
a
g
i
h
c
i
M
L

.

L. Hur

o
n

MICHIGAN

N.Y.

L. Ontario

L. Erie

PA.

MAINE

VT.

N.H.

MASS.

R.I.
CONN.

IND.

OHIO

ILLINOIS

N.J.

DEL.

UNORG.
TERR.

MISSOURI

KY.

VIRGINIA

MD.

N

W

E

S

ARKANSAS

S.C.

TENN.

MISS.

ALABAMA GEORGIA

LA.

REPUBLIC
OF
TEXAS

Gulf of Mexico

FLA.
TERR.

N.C.

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

0

0

100

200 miles

100 200 kilometers

Number of Spindles in
Operation, 1840
Under 5,000
5,000–25,000
25,000–100,000
100,000–250,000
250,000–500,000

MAP 9.1
New England’s Dominance in Cotton
Spinning, 1840

Although the South grew the nation’s
cotton, it did not process it. Prior to the
Civil War, entrepreneurs in Massachu-
setts and Rhode Island built most of the
factories that spun and wove raw cotton
into cloth. Their factories made use of
the abundant water power available in
New England and the region’s surplus
labor force. Initially, factory managers
hired young farm women to work the
machines; later, they relied on immigrants
from Ireland and the French-speaking
Canadian province of Quebec.

Tracy  Jackson  to  form  the  Boston  Manufacturing
Company.  Having  raised  the  staggering  sum  of
$400,000,  they  built  a  textile  plant  in  Waltham,
Massachusetts — the first American factory to perform
all clothmaking operations under one roof. Thanks to
Moody’s improvements, Waltham’s power looms oper-
ated  at  higher  speeds  than  British  looms  and  needed
fewer workers.

The  second  strategy  was  to  tap  a  cheaper  source
of  labor.  In  the  1820s,  the  Boston  Manufacturing
Company recruited thousands of young women from
farm families, providing them with rooms in boarding-
houses  and  with  evening  lectures  and  other  cultural
activities.  To  reassure  parents  about  their  daughters’
moral welfare, the mill owners enforced strict curfews,
prohibited  alcoholic  beverages,  and  required  regular
church attendance. At Lowell (1822), Chicopee (1823),
and other sites in Massachusetts and New Hampshire,
the  company  built  new  factories  that  used  this  labor
system, known as the Waltham-Lowell System.

By the early 1830s, more than 40,000 New England
women were working in textile mills. As an observer
noted, the wages were “more than could be obtained by
the  hitherto  ordinary  occupation  of  housework,”  the
living  conditions  were  better  than  those  in  crowded
farmhouses, and the women had greater independence.

Lucy Larcom became a Lowell textile operative at age
eleven to avoid being “a trouble or burden or expense”
to her widowed mother. Other women operatives used
wages  to  pay  off  their  father’s  farm  mortgages,  send
brothers to school, or accumulate a marriage dowry for
themselves.

To see a longer excerpt of the Lucy Larcom
document, along with other primary sources from
this period, see Sources for America’s History.

Some operatives just had a good time. Susan Brown,
who worked as a Lowell weaver for eight months, spent
half her earnings on food and lodging and the rest on
plays,  concerts,  lectures,  and  a  two-day  excursion  to
Boston. Like most textile workers, Brown soon tired of
the rigors of factory work and the never-ceasing clatter
of  the  machinery,  which  ran  twelve  hours  a  day,  six
days a week. After she quit, she lived at home for a time
and then moved to another mill. Whatever the hard-
ships, waged work gave young women a sense of free-
dom. “Don’t I feel independent!” a woman mill worker
wrote to her sister. “The thought that I am living on no
one is a happy one indeed to me.” The owners of the
Boston Manufacturing Company were even happier. By
combining tariff protection with improved technology

