290

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

and  cheap  female  labor,  they  could  undersell  their
British  rivals.  Their  textiles  were  also  cheaper  than
those  made  in  New  York  and  Pennsylvania,  where
farmworkers were paid more than in New England and
textile wages consequently were higher. Manufacturers
in those states garnered profits by using advanced tech-
nology to produce higher-quality cloth. Even Thomas
Jefferson, the great champion of yeoman farming, was
impressed. “Our manufacturers are now very nearly on
a footing with those of England,” he boasted in 1825.

American Mechanics and
Technological Innovation
By  the  1820s,  American-born  artisans  had  replaced
British immigrants at the cutting edge of technological
innovation. Though few mechanics had a formal edu-
cation, they commanded respect as “men professing an
ingenious art.” In the Philadelphia region, the remark-
able Sellars family produced the most important inven-
tors. Samuel Sellars Jr. invented a machine for twisting
worsted  woolen  yarn  to  give  it  an  especially  smooth
surface.  His  son  John  improved  the  efficiency  of  the
waterwheels powering the family’s sawmills and built a
machine to weave wire sieves. John’s sons and grand-
sons ran machine shops that turned out riveted leather
fire  hoses,  papermaking  equipment,  and  eventually
locomotives. In 1824, the Sellars and other mechanics
founded the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia. Named
after Benjamin Franklin, whom the mechanics admired
for his work ethic and scientific accomplishments, the
institute  published  a  journal;  provided  high-school-
level  instruction  in  chemistry,  mathematics,  and
mechan ical  design;  and  organized  exhibits  of  new
products.  Craftsmen  in  Ohio  and  other  states  estab-
lished similar institutes to disseminate technical knowl-
edge  and  encourage  innovation.  Between  1820  and
1860, the number of patents issued by the U.S. Patent
Office rose from two hundred to four thousand a year.
American  craftsmen  pioneered  the  development
of machine tools — machines that made parts for other
machines.  A  key  innovator  was  Eli  Whitney  (1765–
1825), the son of a middling New England farm family.
At the age of fourteen, Whitney began fashioning nails
and  knife  blades;  later,  he  made  women’s  hatpins.
Aspiring  to  wealth  and  status,
Whitney  won  admission  to  Yale
College and subsequently worked
as  a  tutor  on  a  Georgia  cotton
plantation. Using his expertise in
making hatpins, he built a simple
machine  in  1793  that  separated

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
What new types of prod-
ucts came out of American
factories by the 1840s and
1850s?

Eli Whitney

Eli Whitney posed for this portrait in the 1820s, when he
had achieved prosperity and social standing as the inventor
of the cotton gin and other machines. Whitney’s success
prompted the artist — his young New Haven, Connecticut,
neighbor Samuel F. B. Morse — to turn his creative energies
from painting to industrial technology. By the 1840s, Morse
had devised the hardware for the ﬁrst successful commercial
telegraph and the software — the “Morse Code” — that it
transmitted. Yale University Art Gallery/Art Resource, NY.

the seeds in a cotton boll from the delicate fibers, work
previously  done  slowly  by  hand.  Although  Whitney
patented  his  cotton  engine  (or  “gin,”  as  it  became
known), other manufacturers improved on his design
and captured the market.

Still seeking his fortune, Whitney decided in 1798
to  manufacture  military  weapons.  He  eventually
designed  and  built  machine  tools  that  could  rapidly
produce  interchangeable  musket  parts,  bringing  him
the  wealth  and  fame  he  had  long  craved.  After
Whitney’s death in 1825, his partner John H. Hall built
an array of metalworking machine tools, such as turret
lathes, milling machines, and precision grinders.

Technological  innovation  now  swept  through
Amer ican  manufacturing.  Mechanics  in  the  textile
industry invented lathes, planers, and boring machines
that  turned  out  standardized  parts  for  new  spinning
jennies  and  weaving  looms.  Despite  being  mass-
produced, these jennies and looms were precisely made
and operated at higher speeds than British equipment.

