CHAPTER 9

  Transforming the Economy, 1800–1860

291

on  liberty  and  equality.  They  saw  themselves  as
small-scale producers, equal to one another and free to
work for themselves. The poet Walt Whitman summed
up  their  outlook:  “Men  must  be  masters,  under
themselves.”

Free  Workers  Form  Unions  However,  as  the  out-
work  and  factory  systems  spread,  more  and  more
workers became wage earners who labored under the
control  of  an  employer.  Unlike  young  women,  who
embraced  factory  work  because  it  freed  them  from
parental control and domestic service, men bridled at
their status as supervised wageworkers. To assert their
independent  status,  male  wageworkers  rejected  the
traditional  terms  of  master  and  servant  and  used  the
Dutch word boss to refer to their
employer. Likewise, lowly appren-
tices  refused  to  allow  masters  to
control  their  private  (nonwork)
lives  and  joined  their  mates  in
building  a  robust  plebeian  cul-
ture.  Still,  as  hired  hands,  they
received  meager  wages  and  had
little  job  security.  The  artisan-
republican  ideal  of  “self-ownership”  confronted  the
harsh reality of waged work in an industrializing capi-
talist  society.  Labor  had  become  a  commodity,  to  be
bought and sold.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
How did the capitalist-run
industrial economy conﬂict
with artisan republican-
ism, and how did workers
respond?

Some wage earners worked in carpentry, stonecut-
ting, masonry, and cabinetmaking — traditional crafts
that  required  specialized  skills.  Their  strong  sense  of
identity, or trade consciousness, enabled these workers
to form unions and bargain with their master-artisan
employers. They resented low wages and long hours,
which  restricted  their  family  life  and  educational
opportunities. In Bos ton, six hundred carpenters went
on strike in 1825. That protest failed, but in 1840, craft

The  leading  inventor  was  Richard  Garsed:  he  nearly
doubled  the  speed  of  the  power  looms  in  his  father’s
Delaware  factory  and  patented  a  cam-and-harness
device  that  allowed  damask  and  other  elaborately
designed fabrics to be machine-woven. Meanwhile, the
mechanics  employed  by  Samuel  W.  Collins  built  a
machine  for  pressing  and  hammering  hot  metal  into
dies  (cutting  forms).  Using  this  machine,  a  worker
could make three hundred ax heads a day — compared
to  twelve  using  traditional  methods.  In  Richmond,
Virginia, Welsh- and American-born mechanics at the
Tredegar Iron Works produced great quantities of low-
cost parts for complicated manufacturing equipment.
As a group of British observers noted admiringly, many
American  products  were  made  “with  machinery
applied  to  almost  every  process . . . all  reduced  to  an
almost perfect system of manufacture.”
As  mass  production  spread,

the  American
Industrial Revolution came of age. Reasonably priced
products  such  as  Remington  rifles,  Singer  sewing
machines, and Yale locks became household names in
the United States and abroad. After winning praise at
the Crystal Palace Exhibition in London in 1851 — the
first major international display of industrial goods —
Remington, Singer, and other American firms became
multinational  businesses,  building  factories  in  Great
Britain and selling goods throughout Europe. By 1877,
the Singer Manufacturing Company controlled 75 per-
cent of the world market for sewing machines.

Wageworkers and the
Labor Movement
As  the  Industrial  Revolution  gathered  momentum,  it
changed  the  nature  of  workers’  lives.  Following  the
American  Revolution,  many  craft  workers  espoused
artisan republicanism, an ideology of production based

Diagram of McCormick’s Reaper

The economic revolution was the result, in
part, of increased output created by power-
driven machinery used in factories. However,
machines also increased farm productivity.
Using McCormick’s Reaper and a horse, a
farmer and his son could cut as much grain in
a day as seven men with scythes. They could
now plant more acres and not worry about
the wheat sprouting (and becoming worth-
less) before it could be harvested. Moreover,
as this advertisement from the May 1846
issue of the Cultivator indicates, farmers
could easily repair their new reapers by
providing McCormick with the letter denot-
ing a broken part. Wisconsin Historical Society.

