292

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

with  a  “master’s”  authority  over  his  “servant.”  Other
lawsuits accused unions of “conspiring” to raise wages
and  thereby  injure  employers.  “It  is  important  to  the
best  interests  of  society  that  the  price  of  labor  be
left  to  regulate  itself,”  the  New  York  Supreme  Court
declared in 1835, while excluding employers from this
rule. Clothing manufacturers in New York City collec-
tively agreed to set wage rates and to dismiss members
of the Society of Journeymen Tailors.

journeymen  shoemakers

Labor  Ideology  Despite such obstacles, during the
1830s
founded  mutual
benefit societies in Lynn, Massachusetts, and other shoe-
making centers. As the workers explained, “The capi-
talist has no other interest in us, than to get as much
labor out of us as possible. We are hired men, and hired
men, like hired horses, have no souls.” To exert more
pressure on their employers, in 1834 local unions from
Boston  to  Philadelphia  formed  the  National  Trades
Union, the first regional union of different trades.

Workers  found  considerable  popular  support  for
their cause. When a New York City court upheld a con-
spiracy verdict against their union, tailors warned that
the “Freemen of the North are now on a level with the
slaves of the South,” and organized a mass meeting of
27,000 people to denounce the decision. In 1836, local
juries hearing conspiracy cases acquitted shoemakers
in Hudson, New York; carpet makers in Thompsonville,
Connecticut;  and  plasterers  in  Philadelphia.  Even
when  juries  convicted  workers,  judges  imposed  only
light fines, so labor organizers were not deterred. Then,
in Commonwealth v. Hunt (1842), Chief Justice Lemuel
Shaw  of  the  Massachusetts  Supreme  Judicial  Court
overturned  common-law  precedents  and  upheld  the
right  of  workers  to  form  unions  and  call  strikes  to
enforce closed-shop agreements that limited employ-
ment to union members. But many judges continued
to  resist  unions  by  issuing  injunctions  forbidding
strikes.

Union  leaders  expanded  artisan  republicanism  to
include wageworkers. Arguing that wage earners were
becoming  “slaves  to  a  monied  aristocracy,”  they  con-
demned the new factory system in which “capital and
labor stand opposed.” To create a just society in which
workers  could  “live  as  comfortably  as  others,”  they
advanced a  labor  theory  of  value. Under this theory,
the price of goods should reflect the labor required to
make them, and the income from their sale should go
primarily  to  the  producers,  not  to  factory  owners,
middlemen, or storekeepers. “The poor who perform
the  work,  ought  to  receive  at  least  half  of  that  sum
which is charged” to the consumer, declared minister

Woodworker, c. 1850

Skilled makers took great pride in their furniture, which
was often intricately designed and beautifully executed.
To underline the dignity of his occupation, this woodworker
poses in formal dress and proudly displays the tools of his
craft. A belief in the value of their labor was an important
ingredient of the artisan-republican ideology held by many
workers. Library of Congress.

workers  in  St.  Louis  secured  a  ten-hour  day,  and
President Van Buren issued an executive order setting
a similar workday for federal workers.

Artisans in other occupations were less successful
in  preserving  their  pay  and  working  conditions.  As
aggressive entrepreneurs and machine technology took
command,  shoemakers,  hatters,  printers,  furniture
makers, and weavers faced the regimentation of low-
paid factory work. In response, some artisans in these
trades moved to small towns, while in New York City,
800  highly  skilled  cabinetmakers  made  fashionable
furniture.  In  status  and  income,  these  cabinetmakers
outranked a group of 3,200 semitrained, wage-earning
workers — disparagingly called “botches” — who made
cheaper  tables  and  chairs  in  factories.  Thus  the  new
industrial system split the traditional artisan class into
self-employed craftsmen and wage-earning workers.

When  wage  earners  banded  together  to  form
unions, they faced a legal hurdle: English and American
common law branded such groups as illegal “combina-
tions.”  As  a  Philadelphia  judge  put  it,  unions  were  “a
government unto themselves” and unlawfully interfered

