CHAPTER 9

  Transforming the Economy, 1800–1860

293

Ezra  Stiles  Ely.  Union  activists  agreed,  organizing
nearly fifty strikes for higher wages in 1836. Appealing
to  the  spirit  of  the  American  Revolution,  which  had
destroyed the aristocracy of birth, they called for a new
revolution to demolish the aristocracy of capital.

Women  textile  operatives  were  equally  active.
Competition  in  the  woolen  and  cotton  textile  indus-
tries was fierce because mechanization caused output
to grow faster than consumer demand. As textile prices
fell,  manufacturers’  revenues  declined.  To  maintain
profits, employers reduced workers’ wages and imposed
tougher work rules. In 1828 and again in 1834, women
mill workers in Dover, New Hampshire, went on strike
and won some relief. In Lowell, two thousand women
operatives backed a strike by withdrawing their savings
from  an  employer-owned  bank.  “One  of  the  leaders
mounted a pump,” the Boston Transcript reported, “and
made a flaming . . . speech on the rights of women and
the iniquities of the ‘monied aristocracy.’ ” Increasingly,
young New England women refused to enter the mills,
and  impoverished  Irish  (and  later  French  Canadian)
immigrants took their places.

In 1857, the new economic system faltered, as over-
production and a financial panic sparked by the bank-
ruptcies of several railroads pushed the economy into a
recession. Urban unemployment soared to 10 percent
and reminded Americans of the social costs of indus-
trial production.

The Market Revolution
As  American  factories  and  farms  churned  out  more
goods, legislators and businessmen created faster and
cheaper  ways  to  get  those  products  to  consumers.
Around 1820, they began constructing a massive sys-
tem of canals and roads linking states along the Atlantic
coast  with  new  states  in  the  trans-Appalachian  west.
This transportation system set in motion both a crucial
Market Revolution and a massive migration of people
to the Greater Mississippi River basin. This huge area,
drained by six river systems (the Missouri, Arkansas,
Red,  Ohio,  Tennessee,  and  Mississippi),  contains  the
largest  and  most  productive  contiguous  acreage  of
arable land in the world. By 1860, nearly one-third of
the  nation’s  citizens  lived  in  eight  of  its  states — the
“Midwest,” consisting of the five states carved out of the
Northwest Territory (Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan,
and  Wisconsin)  along  with  Missouri,  Iowa,  and
Minnesota. There they created a rich agricultural econ-
omy and an industrializing society similar to that of the
Northeast.

The Transportation Revolution
Forges Regional Ties
With the Indian peoples in retreat, slave-owning plant-
ers from the Lower South settled in Missouri (admitted
to  the  Union  in  1821)  and  pushed  on  to  Arkansas
(admitted  in  1836).  Simultaneously,  yeomen  families
from  the  Upper  South  joined  migrants  from  New
England  and  New  York  in  farming  the  fertile  lands
near the Great Lakes. Once Indiana and Illinois were
settled,  land-hungry  farmers  poured  into  Michigan
(1837),  Iowa  (1846),  and  Wisconsin  (1848) — where
they resided among tens of thousands of hardworking
immigrants  from  Germany.  To  meet  the  demand  for
cheap farmsteads, Congress in 1820 reduced the price
of federal land from $2.00 an acre to $1.25. For $100, a
farmer  could  buy  80  acres,  the  minimum  required
under  federal  law.  By  the  1840s,  this  generous  policy
had enticed about 5 million people to states and terri-
tories west of the Appalachians (Map 9.2).

To  link  the  midwestern  settlers  to  the  seaboard
states,  Congress  approved  funds  for  a  National  Road
constructed of compacted gravel. The project began in
1811 at Cumberland in western Maryland, at the head
of navigation of the Potomac River; reached Wheeling,
Virginia  (now  West  Virginia),  on  the  Ohio  River  in
1818;  and  ended  in  Vandalia,  Illinois,  in  1839.  The
National  Road  and  other  interregional  highways  car-
ried  migrants  and  their  heavily  loaded  wagons  west-
ward; these migrants passed livestock herds heading in
the opposite direction, destined for eastern markets. To
link the settler communities with each other, state leg-
islatures  chartered  private  companies  to  build  toll
roads, or turnpikes.

Canals and Steamboats Shrink Distance  Even on
well-built  gravel  roads,  overland  travel  was  slow  and
expensive. To carry people, crops, and manufactures to
and  from  the  great  Mississippi  River  basin,  public
money and private businesses developed a water-borne
transportation system of unprecedented size, complex-
ity, and cost. The key event was the New York legisla-
ture’s  1817  financing  of  the  Erie  Canal,  a  364-mile
waterway connecting the Hudson River and Lake Erie.
Previously, the longest canal in the United States was
just 28 miles long — reflecting the huge capital cost of
canals and the lack of American engineering expertise.
New York’s ambitious project had three things working
in  its  favor:  the  vigorous  support  of  New  York  City’s
merchants, who wanted access to western markets; the
backing of New York’s governor, De Witt Clinton, who
proposed to finance the waterway from tax revenues,

