294

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

W

N

S

E

IOWA
TERRITORY

Mis

s
o
u
r
i
R
.

WIS.
TERR.

MICH.

ILL.

IND.

1830–1839

N.Y.

OHIO

PA.

W

MINN.

N

S

E

IOWA

Mis

s
o
u
r
i
R

.

NEBR.
TERR.

UNORG.
TERR.

MO.

Ohio R.

KY.

pi R.
Mississip

ARK.

TENN.

ALA.

GA.

VA.

N.C.

S.C.

KAN.

UNORG.
TERR.

1850–1862

WIS.

MICH.

N.Y.

PA.

VA.

N.C.

S.C.

ILL.

IND.

OHIO

MO.

Ohio R.

KY.

TENN.

pi R.
Mississip

ARK.

MISS.

ALA.

GA.

REPUBLIC
OF TEXAS

LA.

MISS.

TEXAS

LA.

0

0

150

300 miles

FLA.
TERR.

150

300 kilometers

0

0

150

300 miles

FLA.

150

300 kilometers

MAP 9.2
Western Land Sales, 1830–1839 and 1850–1862

The federal government set up local ofﬁces to sell land in the national domain to settlers. Dur-
ing the 1830s, the ofﬁces sold huge amounts of land in the corn and wheat belt of the Midwest
(Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan) and the cotton belt to the south (especially Alabama and
Mississippi). As settlers moved westward in the 1850s, most sales were in the Upper Mississippi
River Valley (particularly Iowa and Wisconsin). Each circle indicates the relative amount of land
sold at a local ofﬁce.

tolls, and bond sales to foreign investors; and the rela-
tively gentle terrain west of Albany. Even so, the task
was enormous. Workers — many of them Irish immi-
grants — dug out millions of cubic yards of soil, quar-
ried thousands of tons of rock for the huge locks that
raised  and  lowered  the  boats,  and  constructed  vast
reservoirs to ensure a steady supply of water.

The first great engineering project in American his-
tory,  the  Erie  Canal  altered  the  ecology  of  an  entire
region.  As  farming  communities  and  market  towns
sprang up along the waterway, settlers cut down mil-
lions of trees to provide wood for houses and barns and
to  open  the  land  for  growing  crops  and  grazing  ani-
mals.  Cows  and  sheep  foraged
in  pastures  that  had  recently
been  forests  occupied  by  deer
and  bears,  and  spring  rains
caused  massive  erosion  of  the
denuded landscape.

Whatever its environmental
consequences,  the  Erie  Canal

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Which was more important
in the Market Revolution,
government support for
transportation or techno-
logical innovations, and
why was that the case?

was an instant economic success. The first 75-mile sec-
tion opened in 1819 and quickly yielded enough reve-
nue  to  repay  its  construction  cost.  When  workers
finished  the  canal  in  1825,  a  40-foot-wide  ribbon  of
water stretched from Buffalo, on the eastern shore of
Lake Erie, to Albany, where it joined the Hudson River
for  the  150-mile  trip  to  New  York  City.  The  canal’s
water “must be the most fertilizing of all fluids,” sug-
gested  novelist  Nathaniel  Hawthorne,  “for  it  causes
towns  with  their  masses  of  brick  and  stone,  their
churches and theaters, their business and hubbub, their
luxury and refinement, their gay dames and polished
citizens, to spring up.”

The Erie Canal brought prosperity to the farmers of
central  and  western  New  York  and  the  entire  Great
Lakes  region.  Northeastern  manufacturers  shipped
clothing,  boots,  and  agricultural  equipment  to  farm
families; in return, farmers sent grain, cattle, and hogs
as well as raw materials (leather, wool, and hemp, for
example)  to  eastern  cities  and  foreign  markets.  One-
hundred-ton freight barges, each pulled by two horses,

