CHAPTER 9

  Transforming the Economy, 1800–1860

295

View of the Erie Canal

This pastoral view of the Erie
Canal near Lockport, New York,
painted by artist John William
Hill, hints at this waterway’s
profound impact on American
life. Without the canal, the town
in the background would not
exist and farmers such as the
man in the foreground would
not have a regional market
for their cattle and grain. The
success of the Erie Canal had
led to the construction of a vast
system of canals by 1860. This
infrastructure was as important
to the nation as the railroad
network of the late nineteenth
century and the interstate
highway and airport trans-
portation systems of the late
twentieth century. © Bettmann/
Corbis.

moved along the canal at a steady 30 miles a day, cut-
ting transportation costs and accelerating the flow of
goods. In 1818, the mills in Rochester, New York, pro-
cessed 26,000 barrels of flour for export east (and north
to Montreal, for sale as “Canadian” produce to the West
Indies); ten years later, their output soared to 200,000
barrels; and by 1840, it was at 500,000 barrels.

The spectacular benefits of the Erie Canal prompted
a  national  canal  boom.  Civic  and  business  leaders  in
Philadelphia  and  Baltimore  proposed  waterways  to
link  their  cities  to  the  Midwest.  Copying  New  York’s
fiscal  innovations,  they  persuaded  their  state  legisla-
tures to invest directly in canal companies or to force
state-chartered  banks  to  do  so.  They  also  won  state
guarantees  that  encouraged  British  and  Dutch  inves-
tors; as one observer noted in 1844, “The prosperity of
America, her railroads, canals, steam navigation, and
banks, are the fruit of English capital.” Soon, artificial
waterways connected Philadelphia and Baltimore, via
the Pennsylvania Canal and the Chesapeake and Ohio
Canal, to the Great Lakes region.

Equally  important  was  the  vast  network  of  navi-
gable  rivers  that  drained  into  the  Mississippi.  Every
year,  25,000  farmer-built  flatboats  used  these  water-
ways  to  carry  produce  to  New  Orleans.  In  1848,  the
completion of the Michigan and Illinois Canal, which
linked Chicago to the Mississippi River, completed an
inland  all-water  route  from  New  York  City  to  New

Orleans, the two most important port cities in North
America (Map 9.3).

The  steamboat,  another  product  of  the  industrial
age, added crucial flexibility to the Mississippi basin’s
river-based transportation system. In 1807, engineer-
inventor Robert Fulton built the first American steam-
boat,  the  Clermont,  which  he  piloted  up  the  Hudson
River.  To  navigate  shallow  western  rivers,  engineers
broadened steamboats’ hulls to reduce their draft and
enlarge  their  cargo  capacity.  These  improved  vessels
halved the cost of upstream river transport along the
Mississippi  River  and  its  tributaries  and  dramatically
increased the flow of goods, people, and news. In 1830,
a traveler or a letter from New York could reach Buffalo
or Pittsburgh by water in less than a week and Detroit,
Chicago, or St. Louis in two weeks. In 1800, the same
journeys had taken twice as long.

The  state  and  national  governments  played  key
roles in developing this interregional network of trade
and  travel.  State  legislatures  subsidized  canals,  while
the national government created a vast postal system,
the  first  network  for  the  exchange  of  information.
Thanks to the Post Office Act of 1792, there were more
than  eight  thousand  post  offices  by  1830,  and  they
safely  delivered  thousands  of  letters  and  banknotes
worth  millions  of  dollars.  The  U.S.  Supreme  Court,
headed  by  John  Marshall,  likewise  encouraged  inter-
state trade by firmly establishing federal authority over

