296

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

MINN.
TERR.

Lake Superior

WIS.

Lake Hur

o
n

MICH.

n
a
ig
h
c
i
M

e
k
a
L

IOWA

Chicago

IND.

Illinois R.

ILL.

Vandalia

Indianapolis

NATIONAL      ROAD

Cincinnati

Missouri R.

St. Louis

Wabash R.

MO.

Louisville

KY.

Cumberland R.

Nashville

TENN.

Arkansas R.

Memphis

ARK.

R
e

d R.

MISS.

pi R.

p
i
s
s
i
s
s
i

M

Natchez

Mobile

LA.

New Orleans

Tennessee R.
ALA.
R
a

.

m

Alaba

Montgomery

Gulf of Mexico

C A N A D A

MAINE

VT.

Hu
ds
o
n
R

.

N.Y.

Albany

N.H.

L. Ontario

Buffalo

Boston

MASS.

R.I.
CONN.

L. Erie

Cleveland
OHIO

Pittsburgh

Wheeling

Columbus

PA.

Cumberland

New York
N.J.

Philadelphia

Baltimore

Ohio R.

VA.

MD.

Potomac R.
       James R.

Richmond

DEL.

N

W

E

S

N.C.

ATL A N T I C
O C EAN

Savannah R.

S.C.

GA.

Charleston

Savannah

Jacksonville

0

0

FLA.

Canals
Roads
Navigable river

200

400 miles

200

400 kilometers

MAP 9.3
The Transportation Revolution:
Roads and Canals, 1820–1850

By 1850, the United States had an
efﬁcient system of water-borne
transportation with three distinct
parts. Short canals and navigable
rivers carried cotton, tobacco, and
other products from the countryside
of the southern seaboard states
into the Atlantic commercial system.
A second system, centered on the
Erie, Chesapeake and Ohio, and
Pennsylvania Mainline canals, linked
northeastern seaports to the vast
trans-Appalachian region. Finally, a
set of regional canals in the Midwest
connected most of the Great Lakes
region to the Ohio and Mississippi
rivers and the port of New Orleans.

interstate commerce (Chapter 7). In Gibbons v. Ogden
(1824), the Court voided a New York law that created a
monopoly  on  steamboat  travel  into  New  York  City.
That decision prevented local or state monopolies — or
tariffs — from impeding the flow of goods, people, and
news across the nation.

Railroads  Link  the  North  and  Midwest
In  the
1850s,  railroads,  another  technological  innovation,
joined canals as the core of the national transportation
system (Map 9.4). In 1852, canals carried twice the ton-
nage  transported  by  railroads.  Then,  capitalists  in
Boston, New York, and London secured state charters
for railroads and invested heavily in new lines, which
by  1860  had  become  the  main  carriers  of  wheat  and
freight from the Midwest to the Northeast. Serviced by
a  vast  network  of  locomotive  and  freight-car  repair
shops, the Erie, Pennsylvania, New York Central, and
the Baltimore and Ohio railroads connected the Atlan-
tic  ports — New  York,  Philadelphia,  and  Baltimore —
with the rapidly expanding Great Lakes cities of Cleve-
land and Chicago (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 298).
The railroad boom also linked these western cities
to  adjacent  states.  Chicago-based  railroads  carried
huge quantities of lumber from Michigan to the tree-
less  prairies  of  Indiana,  Illinois,  Iowa,  and  Missouri,
where  settlers  built  250,000  new  farms  (covering  19
million acres) and hundreds of small towns. On their

return journey, the trains moved millions of bushels of
wheat  to  Chicago  for  transport  to  eastern  markets.
Increasingly,  they  also  carried  livestock  to  Chicago’s
slaughterhouses.  In  Jacksonville,  Illinois,  a  farmer
decided to feed his entire corn crop of 1,500 bushels “to
hogs & cattle, as we think it is more profitable than to
sell  the  corn.”  A  Chicago  newspaper  boasted,  “In
ancient times all roads led to Rome; in modern times
all roads lead to Chicago.”

Initially,  midwestern  settlers  relied  on  manufac-
tured goods imported from the Northeast. They bought
high-quality  shovels  and  spades  fabricated  at  the
Delaware Iron Works and the Oliver Ames Company
in Easton, Massachusetts; axes forged in Connecticut
factories; and steel horseshoes manufactured in Troy,
New York. However, by the 1840s, midwestern entre-
preneurs  were  also  producing  machine  tools,  hard-
ware, furniture, and especially agricultural implements.
Working  as  a  blacksmith  in  Grand  Detour,  Illinois,
John Deere made his first steel plow out of old saws in
1837;  ten  years  later,  he  opened  a  factory  in  Moline,
Illinois, that mass-produced the plows. Stronger than
the existing cast-iron models built in New York, Deere’s
steel  plows  allowed  farmers  to  cut  through  the  thick
sod  of  the  prairies.  Other  midwestern  companies —
such  as  McCormick  and  Hussey — mass-produced
self-raking  reapers  that  harvested  12  acres  of  grain  a
day (rather than the 2 acres that an adult worker could

