CHAPTER 9

  Transforming the Economy, 1800–1860

297

MINNESOTA

Although the railroads seem to form
an integrated system, companies used
different gauges of track and two lines
ending in the same city often did not
connect with one another.

C A N A D A

Even in 1860 it was impossible to go from
New York City to Chicago without changing
trains because of nonconnecting railroad lines.

MAINE

VT.

N.H.

NEW
YORK

IOWA

Des Moines

NEBR.
TERR.

WISCONSIN

Milwaukee

MICHIGAN

Detroit

Chicago

Rochester

Buffalo

Cleveland

PENNSYLVANIA

Boston

MASS.

CONN.

Providence

N

R.I.

New York

W

E

S

ILLINOIS

INDIANA

Indianapolis

OHIO

Pittsburgh

N.J.

Philadelphia

MD.

Baltimore

DEL.

Washington, D.C.

Independence

Cincinnati

KANSAS

St. Louis

MISSOURI

Louisville

KENTUCKY

VIRGINIA

Richmond

In 1852 President Fillmore and Lord
Elgin, the viceroy  for British North
America, met at a jubilee in Boston to
celebrate its rail connection to Canada.

Nashville
TENNESSEE

Raleigh

NORTH CAROLINA

UNORG.
TERR.

Memphis

ARKANSAS

Atlanta

ALABAMA

MISSISSIPPI

Montgomery

Jackson

LOUISIANA

TEXAS

New Orleans

G ulf   of  Mexico

SOUTH
CAROLINA

Charleston

ATL ANTI C OCEAN

GEORGIA

In the South, Atlanta emerged
as the key railway hub.

Jacksonville

FLORIDA

0

0

150

300 miles

150

300 kilometers

Railroads in operation, 1850
Railroads added by 1861

MAP 9.4
Railroads of the North and South, 1850 and 1861

In the decade before the Civil War, entrepreneurs in the Northeast and the Midwest ﬁnanced
thousands of miles of new railroad lines, creating an extensive and dense transportation system
that stimulated economic development. The South built a more limited railroad system. In all
regions, railroad companies used different track gauges, which prevented the efﬁcient ﬂow
of trafﬁc.

cut  by  hand).  With  the  harvest  bottleneck  removed,
farmers planted more acres and grew even more wheat.
Flour soon accounted for 10 percent of all American
exports to foreign markets.

Interregional  trade  also  linked  southern  cotton
planters  to  northeastern  textile  plants  and  foreign
markets.  This  commerce  in  raw  cotton  bolstered  the
wealth  of  white  southerners  but  did  not  transform
their economic and social order as it did in the Midwest.
With the exception of Richmond, Virginia, and a few
other  places,  southern  planters  did  not  invest  their

profits in manufacturing. Lacking cities, factories, and
highly  trained  workers,  the  South  remained  tied  to
agriculture,  even  as  the  commerce  in  wheat,  corn,
and  livestock  promoted  diversified  economies  in  the
Northeast and Midwest.

The Growth of Cities and Towns
The  expansion  of  industry  and  trade  dramatically
increased America’s urban population. In 1820, there
were  58  towns  with  more  than  2,500  inhabitants;  by

