T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

The Risks and Rewards

of Technological

Innovation

The nineteenth century was the Age of Progress, and improved transportation
was one of its hallmarks. Between the 1830s and the 1860s, American capitalists
and  workers,  aided  by  state  governments,  built  steam-powered  railroads  that
stretched across the nation and reduced the cost of moving goods and people by
more  than  90  percent.  Yet,  like  all  major  technological  changes,  the  railroad
revolution was controversial, expensive, and politically explosive.

1.  Speech by John B. Morris, a director of the

Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, July 4, 1828, at
the dedication of the first steam railway in the
United States.

Fellow-Citizens. . . . We have met to celebrate the laying of
the first stone of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad. . . . The
result of our labors will be felt, not only by ourselves, but
also by posterity, — not only by Baltimore, but also by
Maryland and by the United States. We are about opening
the channel through which the commerce of the mighty
country beyond the Alleghany must seek the [Atlantic]
ocean. . . . We are in fact commencing a new era in our
history; for there are none present who even doubt the
beneficial influence which the intended Road will have
in promoting the Agriculture, Manufactures and Inland
Commerce of our country.

2.  Illustration of a passenger car built by M. P. & M. E.
Green of Hoboken, New Jersey, for the Camden
and Amboy Railway, linking New York City and
Philadelphia, 1831.

Source: Division of Work & Industry, National Museum of American History,
Smithsonian Institution.

298

3.  Poster protesting the laying of tracks through the
“most Beautiful Streets” of Philadelphia, 1839.

Source: National Archives.

4.  Opposition to the state financing of railroads from
the Republican Compiler, Gettysburg, Pennsylva-
nia, October 6, 1851. As American track mileage
grew from 3,000 miles in 1840 to 30,000 miles by
1860, entrepreneurs in Pennsylvania, assisted by
the state legislature, led the nation in laying rail.

The Governor’s organ [newspaper] is still harping about
the Governor having paid off the State debt, and reduc-
ing the taxes. If the taxes have been reduced, why is it
that every farmer finds that he has paid MORE TAXES
the last year than he has ever paid in a single year

