before? . . . The true issue is that Gov. Johnston and
his friends created the [huge state] debt. . . .

The people remember that Gov. Johnston voted

$405,000 to the Gettysburg railroad. . . .

They remember that he voted $150,000 to the Dan-

ville and Pottsville railroad.

They remember that he voted $140,000 to the
Laughlintown and Pittsburg railroad, that never was
incorporated.

They remember that he voted $120,000 to the

Norristown railroad.

They remember that he voted for a bill appropriating

over THREE MILLIONS OF DOLLARS to State and
company improvements in one year, and that Gov. Ritner
said that such appropriations would increase the State
debt, in four years, to $45,000,000.

5.  Lyrics to “The Waggoner’s Curse,” c. 1850.

Come all ye bold wagoners turn out man by man
That’s opposed to the railroad or any such a plan;
’Tis once I made money by driving my team
But the goods are now hauled on the railroad by steam. . . .

If we go to Philadelphia, inquiring for a load,
They’ll tell us quite directly it’s gone out on the railroad.
The rich folks, the plan they may justly admire,
But it ruins us poor wag’ners and it makes our taxes

higher . . .

It ruins wheelwrights, blacksmiths, and every other trade,
So damned be all the railroads that ever was made.
It ruins our mechanics, what think you of it, then?
And it fills our country full of just a lot of great rich men.

The ships they will be coming with Irishmen by loads,
All with their picks and shovels, to work on the railroads;
When they get on the railroad, it is then that they are fixed
They’ll fight just like the devil with their cudgels and their

sticks.

The American with safety can scarcely ever pass,
For they will blacken both his eyes for one word of his sass
If it wasn’t for the torment I as life would be in hell,
As upon the cursed railroad, or upon the canal.

6.  Henry David Thoreau, Walden, or, Life in the
Woods, 1854. The workers who built and ran
the railroads suffered high rates of injury and
death — facts noted by Henry David Thoreau,
a critic of the market, transportation, and indus-
trial revolutions of his day.

We do not ride on the railroad; it rides upon us. Did
you ever think what those sleepers are that underlie
the railroad? Each one is a man. . . . The rails are laid

on them, and they are covered with sand, and the cars
run smoothly over them . . . ; so that, if some have the
pleasure of riding on a rail, others have the misfortune
to be ridden upon.

7.  Senator L. J. Rose, from Testimony Taken by the
United States Paciﬁc Railway Commission, 1887.

The railroads have made Southern California what it is
to-day. Before the completion of the . . . Union and Cen-
tral Pacific roads the southern half of California, which
is now famous the world over as the most favored quarter
in America in point of climate and soil conditions, was
no more nor less than a barren sheep pasture. . . . Our
redemption came in 1869, when the railroad people
completed that gigantic and wonderful work . . . ,
giving California a direct rail connection with the
East. The effect was marvelous and immediate. . . .
We beheld ourselves in a day, as it were, surrounded
by possibilities which made us a new and different
people, in a new and completely changed land.

Sources: (1) Eli Bowen, Rambles in the Path of the Steam-Horse (Philadelphia: Wm.
Bromwell and Wm. White Smith, 1855), 37; (4) Adapted from ExplorePAhistory.com;
(5) George Korson, ed., Pennsylvania Songs and Legends (Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 1949), 255–257; (6) Henry David Thoreau, Walden, or, Life in the
Woods, 1854 (Boston, 1910), 102; (7) Testimony Taken by the United States Pacific Railway
Commission, Vol. 5 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1887), 2505.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  What does source 1 tell us about the hopes of steam rail-
road pioneers? Do the other sources suggest their hopes
were achieved?

2.  What does source 2 suggest about early railroad design
and marketing? How does this image contrast with
source 3? What threats does source 3 highlight? What
audiences were the targets of these illustrations, and
how successful are their respective messages?

3.  According to source 4, how did Pennsylvania raise the

money for these subsidies? Who was left holding the bag?
Why would governments fund such private enterprises?

4.  What social tensions do the lyrics to source 5 reveal?
What other conﬂicts are manifest in the documents
presented here?

5.  Who are the “sleepers” in source 6? How does Thoreau
calculate the cost of progress? How are these costs simi-
lar to or different from the ones described by the author
of source 5?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

After re-reading the section in this chapter on the transpor-
tation revolution, answer the following questions: Why did
the transportation revolution take place? What roles in the
spread of the railway, canals, and turnpikes were played by
entrepreneurs and capitalists? By governments, taxpayers,
and various groups of workers? What were some of the
unintended consequences? Who won? Lost? Using these
documents and your answers, write an essay assessing the
beneﬁts and costs of the transition to new transportation
technologies.

299

