300

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

1840, there were 126 such towns, located mostly in the
Northeast and Midwest. During those two decades, the
total number of city dwellers grew more than fourfold,
from 443,000 to 1,844,000.

The fastest growth occurred in the new industrial
towns that sprouted along the “fall line,” where rivers
descended rapidly from the Appalachian Mountains to
the coastal plain. In 1822, the Boston Manufacturing
Company built a complex of mills
in  a  sleepy  Merrimack  River  vil-
lage  that  quickly  became  the
bustling  textile  factory  town  of
Lowell, Massachusetts. The towns
of Hartford, Connecticut; Trenton,
New  Jersey;  and  Wilmington,
Delaware, also became urban cen-
ters as mill owners exploited the water power of their
rivers and recruited workers from the countryside.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
What different types of
cities emerged between
1820 and 1860, and what
caused their growth?

Western  commercial  cities  such  as  Pittsburgh,
Cincinnati, and New Orleans grew almost as  rapidly.
These cities expanded initially as transit centers, where
workers transferred goods from farmers’ rafts and wag-
ons to steamboats or railroads. As the midwestern pop-
ulation  grew  during  the  1830s  and  1840s,  St.  Louis,
Detroit,  and  especially  Buffalo  and  Chicago  also
emerged as dynamic centers of commerce. “There can

be  no  two  places  in  the  world,”  journalist  Margaret
Fuller wrote from Chicago in 1843, “more completely
thoroughfares than this place and Buffalo. . . . The life-
blood  [of  commerce]  rushes  from  east  to  west,  and
back  again  from  west  to  east.”  To  a  German  visitor,
Chicago  seemed  “for  the  most  part  to  consist  of
shops . . . [as if] people came here merely to trade, to
make money, and not to live.” Chicago’s merchants and
bankers  developed  the  marketing,  provisioning,  and
financial services essential to farmers and small-town
shopkeepers  in  its  vast  hinterland.  “There  can  be  no
better  [market]  any  where  in  the  Union,”  declared  a
farmer in Paw Paw, Illinois.

These midwestern hubs quickly became manufac-
turing centers. Capitalizing on the cities’ links to rivers,
canals, and railroads, entrepreneurs built warehouses,
flour mills, packing plants, and machine shops, creat-
ing work for hundreds of artisans and factory laborers.
In 1846, Cyrus McCormick moved his reaper factory
from  western  Virginia  to  Chicago  to  be  closer  to  his
midwestern customers. By 1860, St. Louis and Chicago
had become the nation’s eighth- and ninth-largest cit-
ies; by 1870, they were the fourth and fifth, behind New
York, Philadelphia, and Brooklyn (Map 9.5).

The  old  Atlantic  seaports — Boston,  Philadelphia,
Baltimore, Charleston, and especially New York City —

L. Superior

C A N A D A

Bangor
MAINE

L. Huro

n

MICHIGAN

Detroit

n
a
g
i
h
c
i

M
L

.

WISCONSIN
TERRITORY

Chicago

IOWA
TERR.

L. Ontario

Utica

Rochester

N.Y.

Buffalo

VT.

N.H.

Albany

Lowell
Roxbury
Troy
Springfield

Portland
Salem
Lynn
Boston
Providence

MASS.

New Bedford

Nantucket

R.I.

Poughkeepsie

Newark

Hartford
New Haven

New York
Brooklyn

CONN.

L. Erie

Cleveland
OHIO

Cincinnati

PA.

Reading
Lancaster

Pittsburgh

Trenton
Philadelphia
Wilmington
DEL.

Baltimore
Alexandria Washington

MD.

Norfolk

VIRGINIA

Richmond

Petersburg

NORTH
CAROLINA

SOUTH
CAROLINA

ILLINOIS

INDIANA

St. Louis

MO.

Louisville

KENTUCKY

Ohio R.
Cumberland R.

Nashville

ARK.

TENNESSEE

pi R.

ip
s
s
i
s
s
i

M

MISS.

ALABAMA

GEORGIA

Charleston

LA.

Savannah

Mobile

New Orleans

Gulf of Mexico

FLORIDA

(after Conzen and Pred)

N.J.

N

W

E

S

ATL A N T I C
O CEA N

0

0

100

200 miles

100

200 kilometers

Specialized Roles

Major diversified city
Shipping center
Wholesale center
Regional center
Industrial center
Whaling ports
Urban subsystems

MAP 9.5
The Nation’s Major Cities, 1840

By 1840, the United States boasted
three major conglomerations of
cities. The long-settled ports on
the Atlantic — from Boston to
Baltimore — served as centers for
import merchants, banks, insurance
companies, and manufacturers of
ready-made clothing, and their
ﬁnancial reach extended far into the
interior — nationwide in the case of
New York City. A second group of
cities stretched along the Great Lakes
and included the commercial hubs
of Buffalo, Detroit, and Chicago, as
well as the manufacturing center
of Cleveland. A third urban system
extended along the Ohio River,
comprising the industrial cities of
Pittsburgh and Cincinnati and the
wholesale centers of Louisville and
St. Louis.

