remained  important  for  their foreign  commerce  and,
increasingly, as centers of finance and small-scale man-
ufacturing. New York City and nearby Brooklyn grew
at  a  phenomenal  rate:  between  1820  and  1860,  their
combined  populations  increased  nearly  tenfold  to  1
million  people,  thanks  to  the  arrival  of  hundreds  of
thousands of German and Irish immigrants. Drawing
on  these  workers,  New  York  became  a  center  of  the
ready-made  clothing  industry,  which  relied  on  thou-
sands of low-paid seamstresses. “The wholesale cloth-
ing  establishments  are . . . absorbing  the  business  of
the  country,”  a  “Country  Tailor”  complained  to  the
New York Tribune, “casting many an honest and hard-
working man out of employment [and helping] . . . the
large cities to swallow up the small towns.”

New  York  City’s  growth  stemmed  primarily  from
its dominant position in foreign and domestic trade. It
had the best harbor in the United States and, thanks to
the  Erie  Canal,  was  the  best  gateway  to  the  Midwest
and the best outlet for western grain. Recognizing the
city’s  advantages,  in  1818  four  English  Quaker  mer-
chants  founded  the  Black  Ball  Line  to  carry  cargo,
people,  and  mail  between  New  York  and  London,
Liverpool, and Le Havre, establishing the first regularly
scheduled  transatlantic  shipping  service.  By  1840,  its
port handled almost two-thirds of foreign imports into
the United States, almost half of all foreign trade, and
much  of  the  immigrant  traffic.  New  York  likewise
monopolized trade with the newly independent South
American nations of Brazil, Peru, and Venezuela, and
its merchants took over the trade in cotton by offering
finance, insurance, and shipping to southern planters
and merchants.

New Social Classes
and Cultures
The Industrial Revolution and the Market Revolution
improved the lives of many Americans, who now lived
in  larger  houses,  cooked  on  iron  stoves,  and  wore
better-made clothes. Yet in the booming cities, the new
economic order spawned distinct social classes: a small
but  wealthy  business  elite,  a  substantial  middle  class,
and a mass of propertyless wage earners. By creating a
class-divided society, industrialization posed a momen-
tous challenge to America’s republican ideals.

The Business Elite
Before  industrialization,  white  Americans  thought  of
their  society  in  terms  of  rank:  “notable”  families  had
higher status than those from the “lower orders.” Yet in

CHAPTER 9

  Transforming the Economy, 1800–1860

301

rural  areas,  people  of  different  ranks  often  shared  a
common  culture.  Gentlemen  farmers  talked  easily
with yeomen about crop yields, while their wives con-
versed about the art of quilting. In the South, humble
tenants and aristocratic slave owners enjoyed the same
amusements:  gambling,  cockfighting,  and  horse  rac-
ing. Rich and poor attended the same Quaker meeting-
house or Presbyterian church. “Almost everyone eats,
drinks, and dresses in the same way,” a European visi-
tor  to  Hartford,  Connecticut,  reported  in  1798,  “and
one  can  see  the  most  obvious  inequality  only  in  the
dwellings.”

The  Industrial  Revolution  shattered  this  agrarian
social  order  and  fragmented  society  into  distinct
classes and cultures. The urban economy made a few
city  residents — the  merchants,  manufacturers,  bank-
landlords  who  made  up  the  business
ers,  and
elite — very rich. In 1800, the richest 10 percent of the
nation’s families owned about 40 percent of the wealth;
by  1860,  they  held  nearly  70  percent.  In  New  York,
Chicago,  Baltimore,  and  New  Orleans,  the  super-
rich — the  top  1  percent — owned  more  than  40  per-
cent of the land, buildings, and other tangible property
and an even higher share of intangible property, such
as stocks and bonds.

Government tax policies facilitated the accumula-
tion of wealth. There were no federal taxes on individ-
ual  and  corporate  income.  Rather,  the  U.S.  Treasury
raised most of its revenue from tariffs: regressive taxes
on textiles and other imported goods purchased mostly
by ordinary citizens. State and local governments also
favored the wealthy. They taxed real estate (farms, city
lots,  and  buildings)  and  tangible  personal  property
(furniture,  tools,  and  machinery),  but  almost  never
taxed  stocks  and  bonds  or  the  inheritances  the  rich
passed on to their children.

As cities expanded in size and wealth, affluent fam-
ilies consciously set themselves apart. They dressed in
well-tailored  clothes,  rode  in  fancy  carriages,  and
bought  expensively  furnished  houses  tended  by  but-
lers, cooks, and other servants. The women no longer
socialized with those of lesser wealth, and the men no
longer  labored  side  by  side  with  their  employees.
Instead,  they  became  managers  and  directors  and
relied on trusted subordinates to supervise hundreds of
factory operatives. Increasingly, merchants, manufac-
turers, and bankers placed a premium on privacy and
lived  in  separate  neighborhoods,
often in exclusive central areas or
at the city’s edge. The geographic
isolation  of  privileged  families
and  the  massive  flow  of  immi-
into  separate  districts
grants

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How and why did elite
families change between
1800 and 1860?

