302

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Hartford Family

Completely at home in their elegant drawing room, this elite family in Hartford, Connecticut, enjoys the
fruits of the father’s business success. As the father lounges in his silk robe, his eldest son (and presumptive
heir) adopts an air of studied nonchalance, and his daughter ﬁngers a piano, signaling her musical accom-
plishments and the family’s gentility. A diminutive African American servant (her size suggesting her status)
serves fruit to the lavishly attired woman of the house. The sumptuously appointed drawing room reﬂects
the owners’ prosperity and their aesthetic and cultural interests. © White House Historical Association/Photo by
National Geographic Society.

divided  cities  spatially  along  lines  of  class,  race,  and
ethnicity.

The Middle Class
Standing  between  wealthy  owners  and  propertyless
wage earners was a growing middle class — the social
product of increased commerce. The “middling class,”
a Boston printer explained, was made up of “the farm-
ers,  the  mechanics,  the  manufacturers,  the  traders,
who carry on professionally the ordinary operations of
buying, selling, and exchanging merchandize.” Profes-
sionals with other skills — building contractors, lawyers,

surveyors, and so on — were suddenly in great demand
and well compensated, as were middling business own-
ers and white-collar clerks. In the Northeast, men with
these qualifications numbered about 30 percent of the
population in the 1840s. But they also could be found
in small towns of the agrarian Midwest and South. In
1854,  the  cotton  boomtown  of  Oglethorpe,  Georgia
(population  2,500),  boasted  eighty  “business  houses”
and eight hotels.

The emergence of the middle class reflected a dra-
matic rise  in prosperity.  Between  1830  and  1857,  the
per capita income of Americans increased by about 2.5
percent a year, a remarkable rate that  has never since

