CHAPTER 9

  Transforming the Economy, 1800–1860

303

The Social Dimensions of Whaling

Whale oil fueled the lamps that illuminated the houses of well-to-do Americans in the early nineteenth
century, and bright spermaceti candles made from the waxy substance in the heads of sperm whales
graced their dining tables. To provide these luxuries, ﬁve hundred ships from New Bedford, Massachusetts,
and the nearby island of Nantucket roamed the world on voyages lasting up to three years. Ten thousand
workers — young men seeking adventure and veteran white and black sailors — manned the ships. As this
painting, Capturing a Sperm Whale by William Page (1835, from a sketch by whaler C. B. Hulsart), suggests,
whaling was a dangerous trade that took the lives of many men. © Peabody Essex Museum, Salem, Massachusetts,
USA/The Bridgeman Art Library.

been  matched.  This  surge  in  income,  along  with  an
abundance of inexpensive mass-produced goods, fos-
tered  a  distinct  middle-class  urban  culture.  Middle-
class husbands earned enough to save about 15 percent
of  their  income,  which  they  used  to  buy  well-built
houses in a “respectable part of town.” They purchased
handsome clothes and drove to work and play in smart
carriages.  Middle-class  wives  became  purveyors  of
genteel culture, buying books, pianos, lithographs, and
comfortable  furniture  for  their  front  parlors.  Upper-
middle-class families hired Irish or African American
domestic servants, while less prosperous folk enjoyed
the  comforts  provided  by  new  industrial  goods.  The
middle  class  outfitted  their  residences  with  furnaces
(to  warm  the  entire  house  and  heat  water  for  bath-
ing), cooking stoves with ovens, and Singer’s treadle-
operated  sewing  machines.  Some  urban  families
now  kept  their  perishable  food  in  iceboxes,  which

ice-company wagons periodically
refilled,  and  bought  many  varie-
ties of packaged goods. As early as
1825,  the  Underwood  Company
of  Boston  was  marketing  jars
of well-preserved Atlantic salmon.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
What were the moral
values and material culture
of the urban middle class?

If material comfort was one distinguishing mark of
the  middle  class,  moral  and  mental  discipline  was
another. Middle-class writers denounced raucous car-
nivals and festivals as a “chaos of sin and folly, of mis-
ery and fun” and, by the 1830s, had largely suppressed
them. Ambitious parents were equally concerned with
their children’s moral and intellectual development. To
help  their  offspring  succeed  in  life,  middle-class  par-
ents often provided them with a high school education
(in an era when most white children received only five
years of schooling) and stressed the importance of dis-
cipline and hard work. American Protestants had long

