304

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Architecture for the Emergent Middle Class

This dwelling was well suited for a “farmer of wealth” or a
middle-class suburbanite, according to Andrew Downing,
author of The Architecture of Country Houses (1850). The
exterior of the house exhibited “a considerable degree of
elegance,” while the interior boasted a substantial drawing
room and dining room, for the entertainment of guests, and
a parlor for more intimate conversations among family and
friends. Downing’s books helped to deﬁne the culture of
the growing middle class and diffuse it across the nation.
Andrew J. Downing, The Architecture of Country Houses, 1850.

believed that diligent work in an earthly “calling” was a
duty  owed  to  God.  Now  the  business  elite  and  the
middle class gave this idea a secular twist by celebrat-
ing work as the key to individual social mobility and

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
How did the increasingly
urban, capitalist economy
of the northeastern states
affect the lives of poor
workers?

national prosperity.

Benjamin  Franklin  gave  the
classic  expression  of  this  secular
work  ethic  in  his  Autobiography,
which  was  published  in  full  in
1818 (thirty years after his death)
and  immediately  found  a  huge
audience.  Heeding  Franklin’s

suggestion  that  an  industrious  man  would  become  a
rich  one,  tens  of  thousands  of  young  Ameri can  men
saved  their  money,  adopted  temperate  habits,  and
aimed to rise in the world. There was an “almost uni-
versal  ambition  to  get  forward,”  observed  Hezekiah
Niles, editor of Niles’ Weekly Register. Warner Myers, a
Philadelphia housepainter, rose from poverty by saving
his wages, borrowing from his family and friends, and
becoming a builder, eventually constructing and sell-
ing sixty houses. Countless children’s books, magazine
stories,  self-help  manuals,  and  novels  recounted  the
tales of similar individuals. The self-made man became
a  central  theme  of  American  popular  culture  and
inspired many men (and a few women) to seek success.
Just as the yeoman ethic had served as a unifying ideal
in  pre-1800  agrarian  America,  so  the  gospel  of  per-
sonal  achievement  linked  the  middle  and  business
classes of the new industrializing society.

Urban Workers and the Poor
As thoughtful business leaders surveyed their society,
they  concluded  that  the  yeoman  farmer  and  artisan-
republican  ideal — a  social  order  of  independent
producers — was no longer possible. “Entire indepen-
dence ought not to be wished for,” Ithamar A. Beard,
the  paymaster  of  the  Hamilton  Manufacturing  Com-
pany  (in  Lowell,  Massachusetts),  told  a  mechanics’
association  in  1827.  “In  large  manufacturing  towns,
many more must fill subordinate stations and must be
under the immediate direction and control of a master
or superintendent, than in the farming towns.”

Beard had a point. In 1840, all of the nation’s slaves,
some  2.5  million  people,  and  about  half  of  its  adult
white  workers,  another  3  million,  were  laboring  for
others. The  bottom 10  percent of white wage earners
consisted of casual workers hired on a short-term basis
for  arduous  jobs.  Poor  women  washed  clothes;  their
husbands and sons carried lumber and bricks for con-
struction projects, loaded ships, and dug out dirt and
stones to build canals. When they could find jobs, these
men earned “their dollar per diem,” a longtime resident
told readers of the Baltimore American, but they could
never  save  enough  “to  pay  rent,  buy  fire  wood  and
eatables” when the job market or the harbor froze up.
During  business  depressions,  casual  laborers  suffered
and died; in good times, their jobs were temporary and
dangerous.

Other laborers had greater security of employment,
but few were prospering. In Massachusetts in 1825, an
unskilled worker earned about two-thirds as much as a
mechanic did; two decades later, it was less than half

