as  much.  A  journeyman  carpenter  in  Philadelphia
reported that he was about “even with the World” after
several years of work but that many of his coworkers
were  in  debt.  The  18,000  women  who  sewed  men’s
ready-made  clothing  in  New  York  City  in  the  1850s
earned just a few pennies a day, less than $100 a year
(about $3,000 today). Such meager wages barely paid
for  food  and  rent,  so  poorer  workers  could  not  take
advantage of the rapidly falling prices of manufactured
goods. Only the most fortunate working-class families
could afford to educate their children, buy apprentice-
ships  for  their  sons,  or  accumulate  small  dowries  for
their  daughters.  Most  families  sent  ten-year-old  chil-
dren out to work, and the death of a parent often threw
the  survivors  into  dire  poverty.  As  a  charity  worker
noted,  “What  can  a  bereaved  widow  do,  with  5  or  6
little children, destitute of every means of support but
what  her own hands can furnish (which in a general
way does not amount to more than 25 cents a day)?”

Impoverished  workers  congregated  in  dilapidated
housing in bad neighborhoods. Single men and women
lived  in  crowded  boardinghouses,  while  families
jammed themselves into tiny apartments in the base-
ments  and  attics  of  small  houses.  As  immigrants
poured  in  after  1840,  urban  populations  soared,  and
developers  squeezed  more  and  more  dwellings  and
foul-smelling  outhouses  onto  a  single  lot.  Venturing
into  the  New  York  City  slums  in  the  1850s,  shocked
state  legislators  found  gaunt,  shivering  people  with
“wild ghastly faces” living amid “hideous squalor and
deadly effluvia, the dim, undrained courts oozing with
pollution,  the  dark,  narrow  stairways,  decayed  with
age,  reeking  with  filth,  overrun  with  vermin.”  Many
wage earners sought solace in alcohol, leading to fist-
fights, brawls, and robberies. The urban police, mostly
low-paid  watchmen  and  untrained  constables,  were
unable to contain the lawlessness.

The Benevolent Empire
The disorder among wage earners alarmed the rising
middle classes, who wanted safe cities and a disciplined
workforce. To improve the world around them, many
upwardly mobile men and women embraced religious
benevolence. Led by Congregational and Presbyterian
ministers,  they  created  organizations  of  conservative
social  reform  that  historians  call  the  Benevolent
Empire,  which  became  prominent  in  the  1820s.  The
reformers’ goal was to restore “the moral government
of God” by reducing the consumption of alcohol and
other  vices  that  resulted
in  poverty,  explained
Presbyterian minister Lyman Beecher. Reform-minded

CHAPTER 9

  Transforming the Economy, 1800–1860

305

individuals  had  regulated  their  own  behavior;  now
they tried to control the lives of working people — by
persuasion if possible, by law if necessary.

The Benevolent Empire targeted age-old evils such
as  drunkenness,  adultery,  prostitution,  and  crime,
but its methods were new. Instead
of relying on church sermons and
admonitions
from  community
leaders to combat evil, the reform-
ers  created  large-scale  organiza-
tions: the Prison Discipline Society
and the American Society for the
Promotion of Temperance, among many others. Each
organization had a managing staff, a network of hun-
dreds  of  chapters,  thousands  of  volunteer  members,
and a newspaper.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What was the Benevolent
Empire, and why did it
emerge at this speciﬁc
historical moment?

Often  acting  in  concert,  these  benevolent  groups
worked  to  improve  society.  First,  they  encouraged
people  to  lead  disciplined  lives  and  acquire  “regular
habits.” They persuaded local governments to ban car-
nivals  of  drink  and  dancing,  such  as  Negro  Election
Day (festivities in which African Americans symboli-
cally took control of the government), which had been
enjoyed  by  whites  as  well  as  blacks.  Second,  they
devised new institutions to help the needy and control
the  unruly.  Reformers  provided  homes  of  refuge  for
abandoned children and asylums for the insane, who
previously had been confined by their families in attics
and cellars. They campaigned to end corporal punish-
ment of criminals and to rehabilitate them in specially
designed penitentiaries.

Women  formed  a  crucial  part  of  the  Benevolent
Empire. Since the 1790s, upper-class women had spon-
sored charitable organizations such as the Society for
the  Relief  of  Poor  Widows  with  Small  Children,
founded  in  1797  in  New  York  by  Isabella  Graham,  a
devout  Presbyterian  widow.  Her  daughter  Joanna
Bethune set up other charitable institutions, including
the  Orphan  Asylum  Society  and  the  Society  for  the
Promotion of Industry, which found jobs for hundreds
of poor women as spinners and seamstresses.

Some reformers believed that declining observance
by Christians of the Sabbath (Sunday) as a day devoted
to  religion was  the  greatest  threat  to  the  “moral  gov-
ernment  of  God.”  As  the  Market  Revolution  spread,
merchants  and  storekeepers  conducted  business  on
Sundays, and urban saloons provided drink and enter-
tainment.  To  halt  these  profane  activities,  Lyman
Beecher  and  other  ministers  founded  the  General
Union for Promoting the Observance of the Christian
Sabbath  in  1828.  General  Union  chapters,  replete
with  women’s  auxiliaries,  sprang  up  from  Maine  to

