306

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Cin cinnati and beyond. The General Union demanded
that  Congress  repeal  an  1810  law  allowing  mail  to
be transported — though not delivered — on Sundays.
Members boycotted shipping companies that did busi-
ness  on  the  Sabbath  and  campaigned  for  municipal
laws forbidding games and festivals on the Lord’s day.
The Benevolent Empire’s efforts to impose its Sab-
batarian  values  provoked  opposition  from  workers
and freethinkers. Men who labored twelve to fourteen
hours  a  day,  six  days  a  week,  wanted  the  freedom  to
spend  their  one  day  of  leisure  as
they wished. To keep goods mov-
ing, shipping company managers
demanded  that  the  Erie  Canal
provide  lockkeepers  on  Sundays;
using laws to enforce a particular
set of moral beliefs was “contrary to the free spirit of
our institutions,” they said. When evangelical reform-
ers  proposed  teaching  Christianity  to  slaves,  they
aroused hostility among white southerners. This popu-
lar resistance by workers and planters limited the suc-
cess of the Benevolent Empire.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Who opposed the work
of the Benevolent Empire
and why?

Charles Grandison Finney:
Revivalism and Reform
Presbyterian minister Charles Grandison Finney found
a  new  way  to  propagate  religious  values.  Finney  was
not  part  of  the  traditional  religious  elite.  Born  into  a
poor farming family in Connecticut, he had planned to
become a lawyer and rise into the middle class. But in
1823,  Finney  underwent  an  intense  religious  experi-
ence and chose the ministry as his career. Beginning in
towns  along  the  Erie  Canal,  the  young  minister  con-
ducted  emotional  revival  meetings  that  stressed  con-
version  rather  than  doctrine.  Repudiating  Calvinist
beliefs, he preached that God would welcome any sin-
ner who submitted to the Holy Spirit. Finney’s ministry
drew on — and greatly accelerated — the Second Great
Awakening, the wave of Protestant revivalism that had
begun after the Revolution (Chapter 8).

Evangelical  Beliefs  Finney’s  central  message  was
that  “God  has  made  man  a  moral  free  agent”  who
could choose salvation. This doctrine of free will was
particularly attractive to members of the new middle
class,  who  had  accepted  personal  responsibility  for
their lives, improved their material condition, and wel-
comed Finney’s assurance that heaven was also within
their grasp. But Finney also had great success in con-
verting  people  at  both  ends  of  the  social  spectrum,
from  the  haughty  rich  who  had  placed  themselves

Charles Grandison Finney, Evangelist (1792–1875)

When an unknown artist painted this ﬂattering portrait in
1834, Finney was forty-two years old and at the height of
his career as an evangelist. Handsome and charismatic,
Finney had just led a series of enormously successful reviv-
als in Rochester, New York, and other cities along the Erie
Canal. In 1835, he established a theology department at
newly founded Oberlin College in Ohio, where he trained
a generation of ministers and served as president from
1851 to 1866. Oberlin College Archives.

above God, to the abject poor who seemed lost to drink
and sloth. Finney celebrated their common fellowship
in  Christ  and  identified  them  spiritually  with  pious
middle-class respectability.

Finney’s  most  spectacular  triumph  came  in  1830,
when  he  moved  his  revivals  from  small  towns  to
Rochester, New York, now a major milling and com-
mercial city on the Erie Canal. Preaching every day for
six  months  and  promoting  group  prayer  meetings  in
family  homes,  Finney  won  over  the  influential  mer-
chants and manufacturers of Rochester. They promised
to  attend  church,  give  up  intoxicating  beverages,  and
work  hard.  To  encourage  their  employees  to  do  the
same, wealthy businessmen founded a Free Presbyterian
Church — “free” because members did not have to pay
for pew space. Other evangelical Protestants founded
churches  to  serve  transient  canal  laborers,  and  pious
businessmen set up a savings bank to encourage thrift
among the working classes. Meanwhile, Finney’s wife,

