Lydia,  and  other  middle-class  women  carried  the
Christian message to the wives of the unconverted, set
up Sunday schools for poor children, and formed the
Female Charitable Society to assist the unemployed.

Finney’s efforts to create a spiritual Christian com-
munity were not completely successful. Skilled workers
in  strong  craft  organizations — boot  makers,  carpen-
ters,  stonemasons,  and  boatbuilders — protested  that
they  needed  higher  wages  and  better  schools  more
urgently  than  sermons  and  prayers.  Poor  people
ignored  Finney’s  revival,  as  did  Irish  Catholic  immi-
grants,  many  of  whom  hated  Protestants  as  religious
heretics and political oppressors.

Nonetheless, revivalists from New England to the
Midwest copied Finney’s evangelical message and tech-
niques. In New York City, wealthy silk merchants Arthur
and Lewis Tappan founded a magazine, The Christian
Evangelist, that promoted Finney’s ideas. The  revivals
swept through Pennsylvania, North Carolina, Tennes-
see, and Indiana, where, a convert reported, “you could
not  go  upon  the  street  and  hear  any  conversation,

CHAPTER 9

  Transforming the Economy, 1800–1860

307

except upon religion.” The success
of  the  revivals  “has  been  so  gen-
eral  and  thorough,”  concluded  a
Presbyterian  general  assembly,
“that the whole customs of society
have changed.”

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What was Finney’s central
message, and how did
it inﬂuence the work of
reform movements?

Temperance  The  temperance  movement  was  the
most successful social reform. Beer and rum had long
been standard fare in American rituals: patriotic cere-
monies, work breaks, barn raisings, and games. Long
before  the  arrival  of  spirit-drinking  Irish  and  beer-
immigrants,  grogshops  dotted
drinking  German
almost every block in working-class districts and were
centers of disorder. During the 1820s and 1830s, alco-
hol consumption reached new heights, even among the
elite;  alcoholism  killed  Daniel  Tompkins,  vice  presi-
dent  under  James  Monroe,  and  undermined  Henry
Clay’s bid for the presidency. Heavy drinking was espe-
cially devastating for wage earners, who could ill afford
its  costs.  Although  Methodist  artisans  and  ambitious

The Drunkard’s Progress: From the First Glass to the Grave

This 1846 lithograph, published by N. Currier, suggests the inevitable fate of those who drink. The drunkard’s
descent into “Poverty and Disease” ends with “Death by suicide,” leaving a grieving and destitute wife and
child. Temperance reformers urged Americans to take “The Cold Water Cure” by drinking water instead of
alcoholic beverages. To promote abstinence among the young, in 1836 revivalist preacher Reverend Thomas
Poage Hunt founded the Cold Water Army, an organization that grew to embrace several hundred thousand
children, all of whom pledged “perpetual hate to all that can Intoxicate.” Library of Congress.

