A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

A Debate over Catholic

Immigration

Between  1776  and  1830,  few  immigrants  came  to  the  United  States.  Then,
increasing population and poverty in Europe prompted the migration of hun-
dreds of thousands of Germans (both Catholics and Protestants) and Irish Catho-
lics. The sudden arrival of foreign Catholics amidst the intense Protestantism of
the Second Great Awakening led to religious riots, the formation of the nativist
American Party, and sharp debates in the public press. Contemporary pamphlets
and books offer historians access to the public rhetoric (and the private passions)
of the time.

Lyman Beecher
Catholicism Is Incompatible with
Republicanism

Lyman Beecher (1775–1863) was a leading Protestant min-
ister and the father of a remarkable family: the inﬂuential
minister Henry Ward Beecher and authors Harriet Beecher
Stowe  (Uncle  Tom’s  Cabin)  and  Catharine  Beecher  (A
Treatise  on  Domestic  Economy).  In  A  Plea  for  the  West
(1835), Lyman Beecher warned Protestants of the power-
ful priestly hierarchy of the Roman Catholic Church and its
opposition  to  republicanism.  Papal  encyclicals  issued  by
Pope  Gregory  XVI  (Mirari  Vos,  1832)  and  Pope  Pius  IX
(Quanta Cura, 1864) condemned republicanism, freedom
of conscience, and the separation of church and state as
false political ideologies.

Since the irruption of the northern barbarians, the
world has never witnessed such a rush of dark-minded
population from one country to another, as is now leav-
ing Europe, and dashing upon our shores. . . . They
come, also, not undirected. . . . [They] are led or fol-
lowed quickly by a Catholic priesthood, who maintain
over them in the land of strangers and unknown
tongues an [absolute] ascendancy. . . .

The ministers of no Protestant sect could or would
dare to attempt to regulate the votes of their people as the
Catholic priests can do, who . . . have almost unlimited
power over the conscience as it respects the performance
of every civil or social duty.

There is another point of dissimilarity. . . . The
opinions of the Protestant clergy are congenial with

liberty — they are chosen by the people who have been
educated as freemen, and they are dependent on them
for patronage and support. The Catholic system is adverse
to liberty, and the clergy to a great extent are dependent
on foreigners [the pope and European bishops] opposed
to the principles of our government.

Nor is this all. . . . How many mechanics, merchants,

lawyers, physicians, in any political crisis, might [the
priests] reach and render timid . . . ? A tenth part of the
suffrage of the nation, thus condensed and wielded by the
Catholic powers of Europe, might decide our elections,
perplex our policy, inflame and divide the nation, break
the bond of our union, and throw down our free
institutions. . . .

[Catholicism is] a religion which never prospered but

in alliance with despotic governments, has always been
and still is the inflexible enemy of Liberty of conscience
and free inquiry, and at this moment is the main stay of
the battle against republican institutions.

Source: Lyman Beecher, A Plea for the West (Cincinnati: Truman & Smith, 1835), 72–73,
126, 59–63, 85–86, 59.

Orestes Brownson
Catholicism as a Necessity for Popular
Government

Like Lyman Beecher, Orestes Brownson was born into the
Presbyterian Church, but he quickly grew dissatisﬁed with
its doctrines. After experimenting with Unitarianism, com-
munalism,  socialism,  and  transcendentalism,  Brownson

308

