converted  to  Catholicism  in  1844.  A  zealous  convert,
Brownson  defended  Catholicism  with  rigorous,  provoca-
tive  arguments  in  this  article,  “Catholicity  Necessary  to
Sustain Popular Liberty” (1845).

Without the Roman Catholic religion it is impossible to
preserve a democratic government, and secure its free,
orderly, and wholesome action. . . . The theory of democ-
racy is, Construct your government and commit it to the
people to be taken care of . . . as they shall think proper.
It is a beautiful theory, and would work admirably, if
it were not for one little difficulty, namely, the people are
fallible, both individually and collectively, and governed
by their passions and interests, which not unfrequently
lead them far astray, and produce much mischief.

We know of but one solution of the difficulty, and
that is in religion. There is no foundation for virtue but
in religion, and it is only religion that can command the
degree of popular virtue and intelligence requisite to
insure to popular government the right direction. . . .
But what religion? It must be a religion which is above
the people and controls them, or it will not answer the
purpose. It cannot be Protestantism, [because] . . . the
faith and discipline of a [Protestant] sect take any and
every direction the public opinion of that sect demands.
All is loose, floating, — is here to-day, is there tomorrow,
and, next day, may be nowhere . . . according to the
prejudices, interests, or habits of the people. . . .

Here, then, is the reason why Protestantism, though
it may institute, cannot sustain popular liberty. It is itself
subject to popular control, and must follow in all things
the popular will, passion, interest, ignorance, prejudice,
or caprice.

If Protestantism will not answer the purpose, what
religion will? The Roman Catholic, or none. The Roman
Catholic religion assumes, as its point of departure, that
it is instituted not to be taken care of by the people, but

to take care of the people; not to be governed by them,
but to govern them. The word is harsh in democratic
ears, we admit; but it is not the office of religion to say
soft or pleasing words. . . . The people need governing,
and must be governed, or nothing but anarchy and
destruction await them. They must have a master. . . .
Quote our expression, the people must have a

master, as you doubtless will; hold it up in glaring
capitals, to excite the unthinking and unreasoning
multitude, and to doubly fortify their prejudices
against Catholicity . . . [even as you] seek to bring
the people into subjection to your banks or moneyed
corporations. . . .

The Roman Catholic religion, then, is necessary to
sustain popular liberty, because popular liberty can be
sustained only by a religion free from popular control,
above the people, speaking from above and able to
command them.

Source: Orestes A. Brownson, Essays and Reviews, Chiefly on Theology, Politics, and
Socialism (New York: D. & J. Sadlier, 1852), 368–370, 372–373, 376, 379–381.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  According to Beecher, what speciﬁc dangers does Cathol-
icism pose to American republican institutions? Why do
Protestant churches not pose the same dangers?

2.  Compare and contrast Brownson’s and Beecher’s views
of the social and political impact of Catholicism. How
does Brownson defend the values and practices of the
Catholic Church?

3.  Given Brownson’s statement that “the people must have
a master,” what would be his view of popular demo-
cratic government? Would the leaders of the Protestant
Benevolent Empire agree with any aspects of Brownson’s
social and political philosophy?

309

