310

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

craft  workers  swore  off  liquor  to  protect  their  work
skills,  health,  and  finances,  other  workers  drank
heavily on the job — and not just during the traditional
11 a.m. and 4 p.m. “refreshers.” A baker recalled how
“one man was stationed at the window to watch, while
the rest drank.”

The  evangelical  Protestants  who  took  over  the
American Temperance Society in 1832 set out to curb
the  consumption  of  alcoholic  beverages.  The  society
grew quickly to two thousand chapters and more than
200,000 members. Its nationwide campaign employed
revivalist  methods — group  confession  and  prayer,
using  women  as  spiritual  guides,  and  sudden  emo-
tional  conversion — and  was  a  stunning  success.  On
one  day  in  New  York  City  in  1841,  more  than  4,000
people took the temperance “pledge.” The annual con-
sumption of spirits fell dramatically, from an average of
5 gallons per person in 1830 to 2 gallons in 1845.

Evangelical reformers celebrated religion as the key
to  moral  improvement.  Laziness  and  drinking  might
be cured by self-discipline, as Benjamin Franklin had
argued, but religious conversion would ensure a pro-
found change of heart. Religious discipline and the ide-
ology  of  social  mobility  thus  served  as  powerful
cements, bonding middle-class Americans and wage-
earning  citizens  as  they  grappled  with  the  economic
divisions  created  by  industrialization,  market  expan-
sion, and increasing cultural diversity.

Immigration and Cultural Conflict
Cultural diversity was the result of a vast wave of immi-
gration. Between 1840 and 1860, about 2 million Irish,
1.5 million Germans, and 750,000 Britons poured into
the United States. The British migrants were primarily
Protestants  and  relatively  prosperous — trained  pro-
fessionals,  propertied  farmers,  and  skilled  workers.
Many German immigrants also came from propertied
farming  and  artisan  families  and  had  sufficient
resources  to  move  to  the  midwestern  states  of  Wis-
consin,  Iowa,  and  Missouri.  Poorer  Germans  and
most  of  the  Irish  settled  in  the  Northeast,  where  by
1860 they numbered nearly one-third of white adults.
Most  immigrants  avoided  the  South  because  they
feared competition from enslaved
workers.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Why did the Catholic
hierarchy consider repub-
licanism a threat? Why did
Morse think the same of
Catholicism?

Poverty  The  poorest
Irish
migrants,
Irish  peasants  and
laborers,  were  fleeing  a  famine
caused  by  severe  overpopulation
and  a  devastating  blight  that

destroyed much of the Irish potato crop. They settled
mostly in the cities of New England and New York. The
men took low-paying jobs as factory hands, construc-
tion  workers,  and  canal  diggers,  while  the  women
became  washerwomen  and  domestic  servants.  Irish
families crowded into cheap tenement buildings with
primitive  sanitation  systems  and  were  the  first  to  die
when  disease  struck  a  city.  In  the  summer  of  1849,
cholera epidemics took the lives of thousands of poor
immigrants in St. Louis and New York City.

In  times  of  hardship  and  sorrow,  immigrants
turned to their churches. Many Germans and virtually
all the Irish were Catholics, and they fueled the growth
of the American Catholic Church. In 1840, there were
16 Catholic dioceses and 700 churches; by 1860, there
were 45 dioceses and 2,500 churches. Guided by their
priests and bishops, Catholics built an impressive net-
work of institutions — charitable societies, orphanages,
militia  companies,  parochial  schools,  and  political
organizations — that  maintained  both  their  religion
and their German or Irish identity.

Nativism  Confronted  by  Catholic  and  German-
speaking  immigrants,  some  American-born  citizens
formed  nativist  movements  that  condemned  immi-
gration and asserted the superiority of Protestant reli-
gious and cultural values. In 1834, artist and inventor
Samuel  F.  B.  Morse  published  Foreign  Conspiracy
Against the Liberties of the United States, which warned
of a Catholic threat to American republican institutions.
Morse argued that Catholic immigrants would obey the
dictates of Pope Gregory XVI (1831–1846), who urged
Catholics to repudiate republicanism and acknowledge
the  “submission  due  to  princes”  and  to  the  papacy.
Republican-minded  Protestants  of  many  denomina-
tions  shared  Morse’s  fears  of  papal  interference  in
American  life  and  politics,  and  Foreign  Conspiracy
became their handbook (American Voices, p. 308).

The  social  tensions  stemming  from  industrializa-
tion  intensified  nativist  and  anti-Catholic  attitudes.
Unemployed Protestant mechanics and factory work-
ers  joined  mobs  that  attacked  Catholic  immigrants,
accusing them of taking jobs and driving down wages.
These  cultural  conflicts  undercut  trade  unionism,
because many Protestant wage earners sided more with
their  Protestant  employers  than  with  their  Catholic
coworkers. Benevolent-minded Protestants supported
the anti-Catholic movement for reasons of public pol-
icy.  As  crusaders  for  public  education,  they  opposed
the use of tax resources for Catholic schools; as advo-
cates of temperance and civilized manners, they con-
demned the rowdyism of drunken Irish men.

