CHAPTER 9

  CHAPTER REVIEW

311

Religious and cultural tensions led to violence. In
1834, in Charlestown, Massachusetts, a quarrel between
Catholic  laborers  repairing  a  convent  and  Protestant
workers in a neighboring brickyard led to a full-scale
riot  and  the  convent’s  destruction.  In  1844,  in  Phila-
delphia,  riots  erupted  when  the  Catholic  bishop  per-
suaded public-school officials to use both Catholic and
Protestant  versions  of  the  Bible.  Anti-Irish  violence
incited by the city’s nativist clubs eventually escalated
into open warfare between Protestants and the Pennsyl-
vania  militia.  Thus  even  as  the  American  economic
revolution attracted millions of European immigrants,
it divided society along lines of ethnicity and religion
as well as class.

SUMMARY
This  chapter  examined  the  causes  of  the  economic
transformation of the first half of the nineteenth century.
That  transformation  had  two  facets:  a  major  increase
in  production — the  Industrial  Revolution — and  the

expansion  of  commerce — the  Market  Revolution.
Water, steam, and minerals such as coal and iron were
crucial ingredients in both revolutions — driving factory
machinery,  carrying  goods  to  market  on  canals  and
rivers, and propelling steamboats and railroad engines.
We  also  explored  the  consequences  of  that  trans-
formation: the rise of an urban society, the increasing
similarity  between  the  Northeast  and  Midwest  and
their growing difference from the South, and the cre-
ation  of  a  society  divided  by  class  and  ethnicity.  To
shape this emerging society, benevolent reformers and
evangelical revivalists worked to instill moral discipline
and  Christian  values.  However,  artisan  republicans,
unionized workers, and Irish and German immigrants
had their own cultural values and economic interests.
The result was a fragmented society. As the next chap-
ter suggests, Americans looked to their political system,
which was becoming increasingly democratic, to address
these  social  divisions.  In  fact,  the  tensions  among
economic  inequality,  cultural  diversity,  and  political
democracy became a troubling — and enduring — part
of American life.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts & Events

Industrial Revolution (p. 286)
division of labor (p. 286)
mineral-based economy (p. 287)
mechanics (p. 287)
Waltham-Lowell System (p. 288)
machine tools (p. 290)
artisan republicanism (p. 291)
unions (p. 291)
labor theory of value (p. 292)
Market Revolution (p. 293)

Erie Canal (p. 293)
middle class (p. 302)
self-made man (p. 304)
Benevolent Empire (p. 305)
Sabbatarian values (p. 306)
moral free agency (p. 306)
American Temperance Society

(p. 310)

nativist movements (p. 310)

Key People

Samuel Slater (p. 287)
Francis Cabot Lowell (p. 287)
Sellars Family (p. 290)
Eli Whitney (p. 290)
Cyrus McCormick (p. 300)
Lyman Beecher (p. 305)
Charles Grandison Finney and

Lydia Finney (p. 305)

