312

PART 4

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  What  was  the  impact  of  the  economic  revolution

on the various social groups and classes?

2.  What  different  types  of  reform  movements  arose
during  this  period,  and  what  types  of  change  did
they  advocate?  What  strategies  did  they  use,  and
how successful were they in their efforts?

3.  Did  the  Industrial  and  Market  revolutions  make
America a more “republican” society? Or did they
undermine  republicanism?  Defend  your  interpre-
tation  by  reference
to  specific  events  and
developments.

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events  listed  under  “Work,  Exchange,  and  Tech-
nology” on the thematic timeline on page 283. In
what ways was the economy different in 1860 from
what it had been in 1800? Which factors listed in
the thematic timeline best explain the changes?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  How  did  the
economic revolution described in Chapter 9 affect
the  lives  of  women  in  various  social  groups,  and
how  did  it  make  their  experiences  different  from
those of their mothers, whose political and social
lives were explored in Chapter 6 on the American
Revolution,  and  their  grandmothers,  whose  work
lives  and  cultural  experiences  were  considered  in
Chapter 4?

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  Look  again  at

three
images, the women weavers from Maine (p. 285),
the woodworker (p. 292), and the Hartford family
(p. 302). Taken together, what insights do they pro-
vide  into  the  different  aspects  and  social  conse-
quences of the Economic Revolution?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Stuart M. Blumin, The Emergence of the Middle Class
(1989). Discusses urban class formation during the
nineteeth century.

Charles G. Sellers, The Market Revolution: Jacksonian
America, 1815–1846 (1991). Explores the social
impact of economic change.

Stephen P. Rice, Minding the Machine (2004). Ana-
lyzes the ways in which language reflects and under-
girds changing social and cultural relationships.

Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, The Age of Homespun (2001).
Uses objects of early craft production to tell absorbing
stories that reveal broad historical developments.

Scott A. Sandage, Born Losers: A History of Failure in
America (2005). Focuses on failed entrepreneurs and
the changing cultural meaning of failure.

For a textile operative’s account of mill life, see
fordham.edu/halsall/mod/robinson-lowell.html.
For religion and benevolent societies, consult loc.gov
/exhibits/religion/rel07.html.

