A Democratic Revolution
1800–1844

Europeans  who  visited  the  United

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
What were the main features of the
Democratic  Revolution,  and  what
role  did  Andrew  Jackson  play  in  its
outcome?

States  in  the  1830s  mostly  praised
its  republican  society  but  not  its
political  parties  and  politicians.  “The
gentle men  spit,  talk  of  elections  and  the
price of produce, and spit again,” Frances
Trollope reported in Domestic Manners of the Americans (1832). In her view, American
politics  was  the  sport  of  self-serving  party  politicians  who  reeked  of  “whiskey  and
onions.”  Other  Europeans  lamented  the  low  intellectual  level  of  American  political
debate. The “clap-trap of praise and pathos” from a Massachusetts politician “deeply
disgusted”  Harriet  Martineau,  while  the  shallow  arguments  advanced  by  the  inept
“farmers, shopkeepers, and country lawyers” who sat in the New York assembly aston-
ished Basil Hall.

The  negative  verdict  was  nearly  unanimous.  “The  most  able  men  in  the  United
States are very rarely placed at the head of affairs,” French aristocrat Alexis de Tocqueville
concluded in Democracy in America (1835). The reason, said Tocqueville, lay in the char-
acter of democracy itself. Most citizens ignored important policy issues, jealously refused
to elect their intellectual superiors, and listened in awe to “the clamor of a mountebank
[a charismatic fraud] who knows the secret of stimulating their tastes.”

These  Europeans  were  witnessing  the  American  Democratic  Revolution.  Before
1815, men of ability had sat in the seats of government, and the prevailing ideology had
been republicanism, or rule by “men of TALENTS and VIRTUE,” as a newspaper put it. Many
of those leaders feared popular rule, so they wrote constitutions with Bills of Rights,
bicameral  legislatures,  and  independent  judiciaries,  and  they  censured  overambitious
men  who  campaigned  for  public  ofﬁce.  But  history  took  a  different  course.  By  the
1820s and 1830s, the watchwords were democracy and party politics, a system run by
men who avidly sought ofﬁce and rallied supporters through newspapers, broadsides,
and great public processions. Politics became a sport — a competitive contest for the
votes of ordinary men. “That the majority should govern was a fundamental maxim in
all free governments,” declared Martin Van Buren, the most talented of the new breed
of  professional  politicians.  A  republican-minded  Virginian  condemned  Van  Buren  as
“too great an intriguer,” but by encouraging ordinary Americans to burn with “election
fever” and support party principles, he and other politicians redeﬁned the meaning of
democratic government and made it work.

10

C H A P T E R

THE RISE OF POPULAR
POLITICS, 1810–1828

The Decline of the Notables and

the Rise of Parties

The Election of 1824

The Last Notable President: John

Quincy Adams

“The Democracy” and the

Election of 1828

THE JACKSONIAN
PRESIDENCY, 1829–1837
Jackson’s Agenda: Rotation and

Decentralization

The Tariff and Nullification

The Bank War

Indian Removal

The Jacksonian Impact

CLASS, CULTURE, AND
THE SECOND PARTY
SYSTEM

The Whig Worldview

Labor Politics and the

Depression of 1837–1843

“Tippecanoe and Tyler Too!”

314

