316

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

The Rise of Popular Politics,
1810–1828
Expansion of the franchise (the right to vote) dramati-
cally  symbolized  the  Democratic  Revolution.  By  the
1830s, most states allowed nearly all white men to vote.
Nowhere  else  in  the  world  did  ordinary  farmers  and
wage  earners  exercise  such  political  influence;  in
England, the Reform Bill of 1832 extended the vote to
only 600,000 out of 6 million men — a mere 10 percent.
Equally  important,  political  parties  provided  voters
with the means to express their preferences.

The Decline of the Notables
and the Rise of Parties
The  American  Revolution  weakened  the  elite-run
society  of  the  colonial  era  but  did  not  overthrow  it.
Only  two  states — Pennsylvania  and  Vermont — gave
the  vote  to  all  male  taxpayers,  and  many  families  of
low  rank  continued  to  defer  to  their  social  “betters.”
Consequently, wealthy notables — northern landlords,
slave-owning planters, and seaport merchants — dom-
inated  the  political  system  in  the  new  republic.  And
rightly  so,  said  John  Jay,  the  first  chief  justice  of  the
Supreme Court: “Those who own the country are the
most fit persons to participate in the government of it.”
Jay  and  other  notables  managed  local  elections  by
building  up  an  “interest”:  lending  money  to  small
farmers, giving business to storekeepers, and treating
their tenants to rum. An outlay of $20 for refreshments,
remarked  one  poll  watcher,  “may  produce  about  100
votes.”  This  gentry-dominated  system  kept  men  who
lacked  wealth  and  powerful  family  connections  from
seeking office.

The  Rise  of  Democracy  To  expand  the  suffrage,
Maryland  reformers  in  the  1810s  invoked  the  equal-
rights  rhetoric  of  republicanism.  They  charged  that
property  qualifications  for  voting  were  a  “tyranny”
because  they  endowed  “one  class  of  men  with  privi-
leges  which  are  denied  to  another.”  To  defuse  such
arguments and deter migration to the West, legislators
in  Maryland  and  other  seaboard  states  grudgingly
accepted a broader franchise and
its  democratic  results.  The  new
voters  often  rejected  candidates
who  wore  “top  boots,  breeches,
and  shoe  buckles,”  their  hair  in
“powder  and  queues.”  Instead,

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What was the relationship
between the growth of
democracy and the emer-
gence of political parties?

they  elected  men  who  dressed  simply  and  endorsed
popular rule.

Smallholding  farmers  and  ambitious  laborers  in
the Midwest and Southwest likewise challenged the old
hierarchical  order.  In  Ohio,  a  traveler  reported,  “no
white man or woman will bear being called a servant.”
The constitutions of the new states of Indiana (1816),
Illinois (1818), and Alabama (1819) prescribed a broad
male  franchise,  and  voters  usually  elected  middling
men to local and state offices. A well-to-do migrant in
Illinois was surprised to learn that the man who plowed
his fields “was a colonel of militia, and a member of the
legislature.”  Once  in  public  office,  men  from  modest
backgrounds  restricted  imprisonment  for  debt,  kept
taxes low, and allowed farmers to claim squatters’ rights
to unoccupied land.

By the mid-1820s, many state legislatures had given
the vote to all white men or to all men who paid taxes
or served in the militia. Only a few — North Carolina,
Virginia, and Rhode Island — still required the posses-
sion of freehold property. Equally significant, between
1818 and 1821, Connecticut, Massachusetts, and New
York  wrote  more  democratic  constitutions  that  reap-
portioned  legislative  districts  on  the  basis  of  popula-
tion  and  mandated  the  popular  election  (rather  than
the appointment) of judges and justices of the peace.

Democratic politics was contentious and, because
it  attracted  ambitious  men,  often  corrupt.  Powerful
entrepreneurs  and  speculators — both  notables  and
self-made  men — demanded  government  assistance
and paid bribes to get it. Speculators won land grants
by paying off the members of important committees,
and bankers distributed shares of stock to key legisla-
tors. When the Seventh Ward Bank of New York City
received a legislative charter in 1833, the bank’s officials
set  aside  one-third  of  the  3,700  shares  of  stock  for
themselves and their friends and almost two-thirds for
state legislators and bureaucrats, leaving just 40 shares
for public sale (America Compared, p. 317).

More  political  disputes  broke  out  when  religious
reformers  sought  laws  to  enforce  the  cultural  agenda
of the Benevolent Empire. In Utica, New York, evan-
gelical  Presbyterians  insisted  upon  a  town  ordinance
restricting Sunday entertainment. In response, a mem-
ber  of  the  local  Universalist  church — a  freethinking
Protestant denomination — denounced the measure as
coercive and called for “Religious Liberty.”

Parties Take Command  The appearance of political
parties  encouraged  such  debates  over  government
policy. Revolutionary-era Americans had condemned
political “factions” as antirepublican, and the new state

