A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Alexis de Tocqueville

Letter to Louis de

Kergorlay, June 29, 1831

In  1831,  the  French  aristocrat  Alexis  de  Tocqueville  (1805–1859)  came  to  the
United States to report on its innovative penal system. Instead, he produced a
brilliant analysis of the new republican society and politics, Democracy in Amer-
ica (1835, 1840). This letter to a French friend reveals his thinking and insights.

Do you know what, in this country’s political realm,
makes the most vivid impression on me? The effect of
laws governing inheritance. . . . The English had exported
their laws of primogeniture, according to which the eld-
est acquired three-quarters of the father’s fortune. This
resulted in a host of vast territorial domains passing
from father to son and wealth remaining in families. My
American informants tell me that there was no aristoc-
racy but, instead, a class of great landowners leading a
simple, rather intellectual life characterized by its air of
good breeding, its manners, and a strong sense of family
pride. . . . Since then, inheritance laws have been revised.
Primogeniture gave way to equal division, with almost
magical results. Domains split up, passing into other hands.
Family spirit disappeared. The aristocratic bias that marked
the republic’s early years was replaced by a democratic
thrust of irresistible force. . . . I’ve seen several members
of these old families. . . . They regret the loss of everything
aristocratic: patronage, family pride, high tone. . . .

There can be no doubt that the inheritance law is
responsible in some considerable measure for this com-
plete triumph of democratic principles. The Americans . . .
agree that “it has made us what we are, it is the founda-
tion of our republic.” . . .

When I apply these ideas to France, I cannot resist
the thought that Louis XVIII’s charter [of 1814 sought to
restore the pre-Revolutionary regime by creating] . . .
aristocratic institutions in political law, but [by mandating
equality before the law and retaining the Revolutionary-
era inheritance laws giving all children, irrespective of
sex, an equal share of the parental estate] within the
domain of civil law gave shelter to a democratic principle

so vigorous that it was bound before long to destroy the
foundations of the edifice it raised. . . . We are moving
toward an unrestricted democracy . . . that . . . would not
suit France at all. . . . [However,] there is no human power
capable of changing the law of inheritance, and with this
change our families will disappear, possessions will pass
into other hands, wealth will be increasingly equalized,
the upper class will melt into the middle, the latter will
become immense and shape everything to its level. . . .
What I see in America leaves me doubting that gov-
ernment by the multitude, even under the most favorable
circumstances — and they exist here — is a good thing.
There is general agreement that in the early days of the
republic, statesmen and members of the two legislative
houses were much more distinguished than they are
today. They almost all belonged to that class of land-
owners I mentioned above. The populace no longer
chooses with such a sure hand. It generally favors those
who flatter its passions and descend to its level.

Source: From Letters from America: Alexis de Tocqueville, edited, translated, and with
an introduction by Frederick Brown, Yale University Press, 2010. Copyright © 2010 by
Frederick Brown. Used by permission of Yale University Press.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  According to Tocqueville, what is the legal basis of Ameri-
can social equality and political democracy? What is the
comparable situation in France?

2.  Why does Tocqueville doubt that democratic rule is a

good thing, even in the United States, and “would not
suit France at all”?

and national constitutions made no mention of politi-
cal parties. However, as the power of notables waned in
the  1820s,  disciplined  political  parties  appeared  in  a
number of states. Usually they were run by professional
politicians, often middle-class lawyers and journalists.
One observer called the new parties political machines
because, like the new power-driven textile looms, they

efficiently wove together the interests of diverse social
and economic groups.

Martin Van Buren of New York was the chief archi-
tect of the emerging system of party government. The
ambitious  son  of  a  Jeffersonian  tavern  keeper,  Van
Buren  grew  up  in  the  landlord-dominated  society  of
the Hudson River Valley. To get training as a lawyer, he

317

