318

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Between 1817 and 1821 in New York, Van Buren
turned  his  “Bucktail”  supporters  (who  wore  a  deer’s
tail  on  their  hats)  into  the  first  statewide  political
machine.  He  purchased  a  newspaper,  the  Albany
Argus, and used it to promote his policies and get out
the vote. Patronage was an even more important tool.
When Van Buren’s Bucktails won control of the New
York  legislature  in  1821,  they  acquired  the  power  to
appoint  some  six  thousand  of  their  friends  to  posi-
tions  in  New  York’s  legal  bureaucracy  of  judges,  jus-
tices  of  the  peace,  sheriffs,  deed  commissioners,  and
coroners.  Critics  called  this  ruthless  distribution  of
offices  a  spoils  system,  but  Van  Buren  argued  it  was
fair, operating “sometimes in favour of one party, and
sometimes  of  another.”  Party  government  was  thor-
oughly republican, he added, because it reflected the
preferences  of  a  majority  of  the  citizenry.  To  ensure
the  passage  of  the  party’s  legislative  program,  Van
Buren insisted on disciplined voting as determined by
a  caucus,  a  meeting  of  party  leaders.  On  one  crucial
occasion, the “Little Magician” — a nickname reflect-
ing Van Buren’s short stature and political dexterity —
honored seventeen New York legislators for sacrificing
“individual  preferences  for  the  general  good”  of  the
party.

The Election of 1824
The advance of political democracy in the states under-
mined  the  traditional  notable-dominated  system  of
national politics. After the War of 1812, the aristocratic
Federalist  Party  virtually  disappeared,  and
the
Republican  Party  splintered  into  competing  factions
(Chapter 7). As the election of 1824 approached, five
Republican candidates campaigned for the presidency.
Three  were  veterans  of  President  James  Monroe’s
cabinet: Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, the son
of  former  president  John  Adams;  Secretary  of  War
John  C.  Calhoun;  and  Secretary  of  the  Treasury
William  H.  Crawford.  The  other  candidates  were
Henry Clay of Kentucky, the hard-drinking, dynamic
Speaker of the House of Representatives; and General
Andrew Jackson, now a senator from Tennessee. When
the Republican caucus in Congress selected Crawford
as  the  party’s  official  nominee,  the  other  candidates
took  their  case  to  the  voters.  Thanks  to  democratic
reforms,  eighteen  of  the  twenty-four  states  required
popular elections (rather than a vote of the state legis-
lature) to choose their representatives to the electoral
college.

Each candidate had strengths. Thanks to his diplo-
matic  successes  as  secretary  of  state,  John  Quincy

Martin Van Buren

Martin Van Buren’s skills as a lawyer and a politician won
him many admirers, as did his personal charm, sharp intellect,
and imperturbable composure. “Little Van” — a mere 5 feet
6 inches in height — had almost as many detractors. Davy
Crockett, Kentucky frontiersman, land speculator, and con-
gressman, labeled him “an artful, cunning, intriguing, selﬁsh
lawyer,” concerned only with “ofﬁce and money.” In truth,
Van Buren was a complex man, a middle-class lawyer with
republican values and aristocratic tastes who nonetheless
created a democratic political party. National Portrait Gallery,
Smithsonian Institution/Art Resource, NY.

relied  on  the  Van  Ness  clan,  a  powerful  local  gentry
family. Then, determined not to become their depen-
dent “tool,” Van Buren repudiated their tutelage and set
out to create a political order based on party identity,
not  family  connections.  In  justifying  party  govern-
ments,  Van  Buren  rejected  the  traditional  republican
belief  that  political  factions  were  dangerous  and
claimed that the opposite was true: “All men of sense
know  that  political  parties  are  inseparable  from  free
government,” because they checked an elected official’s
inherent “disposition to abuse power.”

To see a longer excerpt of Martin Van Buren’s
autobiography, along with other primary sources
from this period, see Sources for America’s History.

