Adams enjoyed national recognition; and his family’s
prestige  in  Massachusetts  ensured  him  the  electoral
votes of New England. Henry Clay based his candidacy
on  the  American  System,  his  integrated  mercantilist
program of national economic development similar to
the Commonwealth System of the state governments.
Clay  wanted  to  strengthen  the  Second  Bank  of  the
United  States,  raise  tariffs,  and  use  tariff  revenues  to
finance  internal  improvements,  that  is,  public  works
such  as  roads  and  canals.  His  nationalistic  program
won praise in the West, which needed better transpor-
tation, but elicited sharp criticism in the South, which
relied  on  rivers  to  market  its  cotton  and  had  few
manufacturing industries to protect. William Crawford
of  Georgia,  an  ideological  heir  of  Thomas  Jefferson,
denounced  Clay’s  American  System  as  a  scheme  to
“consolidate”  political  power  in  Washington.  Recog-
nizing Crawford’s appeal in the South, John C. Calhoun
of South Carolina withdrew from the race and endorsed
Andrew Jackson.

As the hero of the Battle of New Orleans, Jackson
benefitted from the surge of patriotism after the War
of  1812.  Born  in  the  Carolina  backcountry,  Jackson
settled in Nashville, Tennessee, where he formed ties to
influential families through marriage and a career as an
attorney  and  a  slave-owning  cotton  planter.  His  rise
from common origins symbolized the new democratic
age,  and  his  reputation  as  a  “plain  solid  republican”
attracted  voters  in  all  regions.  Still,  Jackson’s  strong
showing in the electoral college surprised most politi-
cal leaders. The Tennessee senator received 99 electoral
votes;  Adams  garnered  84  votes;  Crawford,  struck
down  by  a  stroke  during  the  campaign,  won  41;  and
Clay finished with 37 (Map 10.1).

Because no candidate received an absolute major-
ity, the Twelfth Amendment to the Constitution (rati-
fied in 1804) set the rules: the House of Representatives
would  choose  the  president  from  among  the  three
highest  vote-getters.  This  procedure  hurt  Jackson
because many congressmen feared that the rough-hewn
“military  chieftain”  might  become  a  tyrant.  Excluded
from the race, Henry Clay used his influence as Speaker
to thwart Jackson’s election. Clay assembled a coalition
of  representatives  from  New  England  and  the  Ohio
River Valley that voted Adams into the presidency in
1825. Adams showed his gratitude by appointing Clay
his secretary of state, the traditional stepping-stone to
the presidency. Clay’s appointment was politically fatal
for  both  men:  Jackson’s  supporters  accused  Clay  and
Adams of making a corrupt bargain, and they vowed to
oppose Adams’s policies and to prevent Clay’s rise to
the presidency.

CHAPTER 10

  A Democratic Revolution, 1800–1844

319

9

4

26

7

7

8
15
8

8

2
1
3

541
28

1

24

15

11

MICH. TERR.

UNORGANIZED
TERRITORY

3

ARK.
TERR.

2

1

16

5

14

11

3

5

9

3

2

FLA. TER

R.

Candidate

Electoral
  Vote*

Popular
Vote

Percent of
  Popular Vote

John Quincy Adams
Andrew Jackson
Henry Clay

William H. Crawford

84
99

37
41

108,740
153,544

47,136

46,618

30.5
43.1

13.2

13.1

*No distinct political parties.

MAP 10.1
The Presidential Election of 1824

Regional voting was the dominant pattern in 1824.
John Quincy Adams captured every electoral vote in
New England and most of those in New York; Henry
Clay carried Ohio and Kentucky, the most populous
trans-Appalachian states; and William Crawford took
the southern states of Virginia and Georgia. Only
Andrew Jackson claimed a national constituency,
winning Pennsylvania and New Jersey in the East,
Indiana and most of Illinois in the Midwest, and
much of the South. Only 356,000 Americans voted,
about 27 percent of the eligible electorate.

The Last Notable President:
John Quincy Adams
As  president,  Adams  called  for  bold  national  action.
“The moral purpose of the Creator,” he told Congress,
was to use the president to “improve the conditions of
himself  and  his  fellow  men.”  Adams  called  for  the
establishment of a national university in Washington,
scientific explorations in the Far West, and a uniform
standard of weights and measures. Most important, he
endorsed Henry Clay’s American
System and its three key elements:
protective
to  stimulate
manufacturing,  federally  subsi-
dized  roads  and  canals  to  facili-
tate  commerce,  and  a  national
bank to control credit and provide
a uniform currency.

tariffs

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Why did Jacksonians
consider the political deal
between Adams and Clay
“corrupt”?

