320

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

The  Fate  of  Adams’s  Policies  Manufacturers,
entrepreneurs, and farmers in the Northeast and Mid-
west welcomed Adams’s proposals. However, his poli-
cies  won  little  support  in  the  South,  where  planters
opposed  protective  tariffs  because  these  taxes  raised
the price of manufactures. South-
ern smallholders also feared pow-
erful banks that could force them
into bankruptcy. From his death-
bed, Thomas Jefferson condemned
Adams  for  promoting  “a  single
and  splendid  government  of
[a  monied]  aristocracy . . . riding
and  ruling  over  the  plundered  ploughman  and  beg-
gared yeomanry.”

EXPLAIN CAUSES
What were the suc-
cesses and failures of
John Adams’s presidency,
and what accounted for
those outcomes?

Other politicians objected to the American System
on constitutional grounds. In 1817, President Madison
had vetoed the Bonus Bill, which proposed using the
national government’s income from the Second Bank
of the United States to fund improvement projects in
the states. Such projects, Madison argued, were the sole
responsibility of the states, a sentiment shared by the
Republican  followers  of  Thomas  Jefferson.  In  1824,
Martin  Van  Buren  likewise  declared  his  allegiance  to
the  constitutional  “doctrines  of  the  Jefferson  School”
and  his  opposition  to  “consolidated  government,”  a
powerful and potentially oppressive national adminis-
tration. Now a member of the U.S. Senate, Van Buren
helped  to  defeat  most  of  Adams’s  proposed  subsidies
for roads and canals.

The  Tariff  Battle  The  major  battle  of  the  Adams
administration came over tariffs. The Tariff of 1816 had
placed  relatively  high  duties  on  imports  of  cheap
English  cotton  cloth,  allowing  New  England  textile
producers  to  control  that  segment  of  the  market.  In
1824, Adams and Clay secured a  new tariff that pro-
tected New England and Pennsylvania manufacturers
from  more  expensive  woolen  and  cotton  textiles  and
also English iron goods. Without these tariffs, British
imports would have dominated the market and signifi-
cantly  inhibited  American  industrial  development
(Chapter 9, America Compared, p. 289).

Recognizing  the  appeal  of  tariffs,  Van  Buren  and
his  Jacksonian  allies  hopped  on  the  bandwagon.  By
increasing duties on wool, hemp, and other imported
raw materials, they hoped to win the support of farm-
ers  in  New  York,  Ohio,  and  Kentucky  for  Jackson’s
presidential candidacy in 1828. The tariff had become a
political  weapon.  “I  fear  this  tariff  thing,”  remarked
Thomas Cooper, the president of the College of South

Carolina  and  an  advocate  of  free  trade.  “[B]y  some
strange  mechanical  contrivance  [it  has  become] . . . a
machine  for  manufacturing  Presidents,  instead  of
broadcloths, and bed blankets.” Disregarding southern
protests, northern Jacksonians joined with supporters
of Adams and Clay to enact the Tariff of 1828, which
raised  duties  significantly  on  raw  materials,  textiles,
and iron goods.

The new tariff enraged the South, which produced
the  world’s  cheapest  raw  cotton  and  did  not  need  to
protect  its  main  industry.  Moreover,  the  tariff  cost
southern planters about $100 million a  year. Planters
had  to  buy  either  higher-cost  American  textiles  and
iron  goods,  thus  enriching  northeastern  businesses
and  workers,  or  highly  dutied  British  imports,  thus
paying the expenses of the national government. The
new  tariff  was  “little  less  than  legalized  pillage,”  an
Alabama  legislator  declared,  calling  it  a  Tariff  of
Abominations.  Ignoring  the  Jacksonians’  support  for
the Tariff of 1828, most southerners heaped blame on
President Adams.

Southern  governments  also  criticized  Adams’s
Indian policy. A deeply moral man, the president sup-
ported  the  treaty-guaranteed  land  rights  of  Native

The “Tariff of Abominations”

Political cartoons enjoyed wide use in eighteenth-century
England and became popular in the United States during the
political battles of the First Party System (1794–1815). By the
1820s, American newspapers, the mouthpiece of political
parties, published cartoons daily. This cartoon attacks the
tariffs of 1828 and 1832 as hostile to the prosperity of the
South. The gaunt ﬁgure on the left represents a southern
planter, starved by high tariff duties, while the northern
textile manufacturer has grown stout feasting on the
bounty of protectionism. © Bettmann/Corbis.

