Americans against expansion-minded whites. In 1825,
U.S.  commissioners  had  secured  a  treaty  from  one
faction  of  Creeks  ceding  its  lands  in  Georgia  to  the
United  States  for  eventual  sale  to  the  state’s  citizens.
When  the  Creek  National  Council  repudiated  the
treaty,  claiming  that  it  was  fraudulent,  Adams  called
for  new  negotiations.  In  response,  Georgia  governor
George  M.  Troup  attacked  the  president  as  a  “public
enemy . . . the unblushing ally of the savages.” Mobil-
izing  Georgia’s  congressional  delegation,  Troup  per-
suaded Congress to extinguish the Creeks’ land titles,
forcing most Creeks to leave the state.

Elsewhere, Adams’s primary weakness was his out-
of-date political style. The last notable to serve in the
White House, he acted the part: aloof, inflexible, and
paternalistic. When Congress rejected his activist eco-
nomic policies, Adams accused its members of follow-
ing the whims of public opinion and told them not to
be enfeebled “by the will of our constituents.” Ignoring
his waning popularity, the president refused to dismiss
hostile  federal  bureaucrats  or  to  award  offices  to  his
supporters.  Rather  than  “run”  for  reelection  in  1828,
Adams  “stood”  for  it,  telling  friends,  “If  my  country
wants my services, she must ask for them.”

“The Democracy” and the
Election of 1828
Martin Van Buren and the politicians handling Andrew
Jackson’s campaign for the presidency had no reserva-
tions  about  running  for  office.  To  put  Jackson  in  the
White House, Van Buren revived the political coalition
created  by  Thomas  Jefferson,  championing  policies
that appealed to both southern planters and northern
farmers  and  artisans,  the  “plain  Republicans  of  the
North.”  John  C.  Calhoun,  Jackson’s  running  mate,
brought his South Carolina allies into Van Buren’s party,
and Jackson’s close friends in Tennessee rallied voters
throughout  the  Old  Southwest.  The  Little  Magician
hoped that a national party would reconcile the diverse
“interests” that, as James Madison suggested in “Fed-
eralist No. 10” (Chapter 6), inevitably existed in a large
republic. Equally important, added Jackson’s ally Duff
Green,  it  would  put  the  “anti-slave  party  in  the
North . . . to sleep for twenty years to come.”

At  Van  Buren’s  direction,  the  Jacksonians  orches-
trated a massive publicity campaign. In New York, fifty
Democrat-funded  newspapers  declared  their  support
for  Jackson.  Elsewhere,  Jacksonians  used  mass  meet-
ings,  torchlight  parades,  and  barbecues  to  celebrate
the  candidate’s  frontier  origin  and  rise  to  fame.  They

CHAPTER 10

  A Democratic Revolution, 1800–1844

321

praised “Old Hickory” as a “natural” aristocrat, a self-
made man.

The  Jacksonians  called  themselves  Democrats  or
“the Democracy” to convey their egalitarian message.
As Thomas Morris told the Ohio legislature, Democrats
were fighting for equality: the republic had been cor-
rupted  by  legislative  chart ers  that  gave  “a  few  indi-
viduals rights and privileges not enjoyed by the citizens
at large.” Morris promised that the Dem ocracy would
destroy  such  “artificial  distinction.”  Jackson  himself
declared that “equality among the people in the rights
conferred by government” was the “great radical prin-
ciple of freedom.”

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
Jackson lost the presi-
dential election of 1824
and won in 1828: what
changes explain these
different outcomes?

Jackson’s message appealed to many social groups.
His  hostility  to  corporations  and  to  Clay’s  American
System won support from north-
eastern artisans and workers who
felt  threatened  by  industrializa-
tion.  Jackson  also  captured  the
votes  of  Pennsylvania  ironwork-
ers  and  New  York  farmers  who
had  benefitted  from  the  contro-
versial  Tariff  of  Abominations.
Yet, by astutely declaring his sup-
port for a “judicious” tariff that would balance regional
interests, Jackson remained popular in the South. Old
Hickory likewise garnered votes in the Southeast and
Midwest, where his well-known hostility toward Native
Americans  reassured  white  farmers  seeking  Indian
removal.

The Democrats’ celebration of popular rule carried
Jackson into office. In 1824, about one-quarter of the
electorate had voted; in 1828, more than one-half went
to  the  polls,  and  56  percent  voted  for  the  Tennessee
senator (Figure 10.1 and Map 10.2). The first president
from a trans-Appalachian state, Jackson cut a dignified
figure as he traveled to Washington. He “wore his hair
carelessly  but  not  ungracefully  arranged,”  an  English
observer  noted,  “and  in  spite of  his  harsh,  gaunt  fea-
tures  looked  like  a  gentleman  and  a  soldier.”  Still,
Jackson’s popularity and sharp temper frightened men
of wealth. Senator Daniel Webster of Massachusetts, a
former Federalist and now a corporate lawyer, warned
his clients that the new president would “bring a breeze
with  him.  Which  way  it  will  blow,  I  cannot  tell
[but] . . . my fear is stronger than my hope.” Supreme
Court justice Joseph Story shared Webster’s apprehen-
sions.  Watching  an  unruly  Inauguration  Day  crowd
climb over the elegant White House furniture to con-
gratulate  Jackson,  Story  lamented  that  “the  reign  of
King ‘Mob’ seemed triumphant.”

