322

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

All eligible voters

Winner

Democratic votes

Nonparticipating
voters

Republican/Whig votes

Votes for other parties

1824

1828

1832

John Quincy Adams
Andrew Jackson
Henry Clay
William H. Crawford

Andrew Jackson
John Quincy Adams

Andrew Jackson
Henry Clay
William Wirt
John Floyd

1836

1840

1844

Martin Van Buren
William H. Harrison
Hugh L. White
Daniel Webster
W. P. Mangum

William H. Harrison
Martin Van Buren

James K. Polk
Henry Clay
James G. Birney

FIGURE 10.1
The Rise of Voter Turnout, 1824–1844

As the shrinking white sections of these
pie graphs indicate, the proportion of
eligible voters who cast ballots in presi-
dential elections increased dramatically
over time. In 1824, 27 percent voted; in
1840 and thereafter, about 80 percent
went to the polls. Voter participation
soared ﬁrst in 1828, when Andrew
Jackson and John Quincy Adams con-
tested for the White House, and again
in 1840, as competition heated up
between Democrats and Whigs, who
advocated different policies and phi-
losophies of government. Democrats
won most of these contests because
their policies had greater appeal to
ordinary citizens.

MICH. TERR.

UNORGANIZED
TERRITORY

3

ARK.
TERR.

5

16

3

5

14

11

3

5

9

8 1

4

7

8
15
8

8

3
6

16

20

28
5

24

15

11

FLA. TER

R.

Candidate

Electoral
  Vote

Popular
Vote

Percent of
  Popular Vote

Andrew Jackson
(Democratic Republican)

178

647,286

John Q. Adams
(National Republican)

83

508,064

56

44

MAP 10.2
The Presidential Election of 1828

As in 1824, John Quincy Adams carried all of New
England and some of the Mid-Atlantic states. However,
Andrew Jackson swept the rest of the nation and won
a resounding victory in the electoral college. Over 1.1
million American men cast ballots in 1828, more than
three times the number who voted in 1824.

The Jacksonian Presidency,
1829–1837
American-style  political  democracy — a  broad  fran-
chise, a disciplined political party, and policies favor-
ing  specific  interests — ushered  Andrew  Jackson  into
office. Jackson used his popular mandate to transform
the policies of the national government and the defini-
tion  of  the  presidency.  During  his  two  terms,  he
enhanced  presidential  authority,  destroyed  the  mer-
cantilist and nationalist American System, and estab-
lished a new ideology of limited government. An Ohio
supporter summed up Jackson’s vision: “the Sovereignty
of the People, the Rights of the States, and a Light and
Simple Government.”

Jackson’s Agenda: Rotation
and Decentralization
To  make  policy,  Jackson  relied  primarily  on  his  so-
called  Kitchen  Cabinet.  Its  most  influential  members
were  two  Kentuckians,  Francis  Preston  Blair,  who
edited the Washington Globe, and Amos Kendall, who
wrote Jackson’s speeches; Roger B. Taney of Maryland,
who became attorney general, treasury secretary, and

