CHAPTER 10

  A Democratic Revolution, 1800–1844

323

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Jackson cut the national
budget and the national
debt but increased the
number of federal employ-
ees. How do you explain
this paradox?

Jackson’s  highest  priority  was  to  destroy  the
American  System.  He  believed  that  Henry  Clay’s
system — and  all  government-sponsored  plans  for
national  economic  development — were  contrary  to
the  Consti tution,  encouraged  “consolidated  govern-
ment,” and, through higher tariffs, increased the bur-
den  of  taxation.  As  Clay  noted
apprehensively, the new president
wanted “to cry down old [expan-
sive,  Hamiltonian]  constructions
of  the  Constitution . . . to  make
all Jefferson’s opinions the articles
of  faith  of  the  new  Church.”
Declaring  that  the  “voice  of  the
people”  called  for  “economy  in
the expenditures of the Government,” Jackson rejected
national subsidies for transportation projects. Invoking
constitutional  arguments,  he  vetoed  four  internal
improvement bills in 1830, including an extension of
the National Road, arguing that they infringed on “the
reserved  powers  of  states.”  By  eliminating  potential
expenditures by the federal government, these vetoes
also  undermined  the  case  for  protective  tariffs.  As
Jacksonian  senator  William  Smith  of  South  Carolina
pointed  out,  “[D]estroy  internal  improvements  and
you leave no motive for the tariff.”

The Tariff and Nullification
The  Tariff  of  1828  had  helped  Jackson  win  the  presi-
dency, but it saddled him with a major political crisis.
There  was  fierce  opposition  to  high  tariffs  through-
out  the  South  and  especially  in  South  Carolina.  That
state  was  the  only  one  with  an  African  American
majority — 56 percent of the population in 1830 — and
its  slave  owners,  like  the  white  sugar  planters  in  the
West Indies, feared a black rebellion. Even more, they
worried about the legal abolition of slavery. The British
Parliament had declared that slavery in its West Indian
colonies would end in 1833; South Carolina planters,
vividly  recalling  northern  efforts  to  end  slavery  in
Missouri (Chapter 8), worried that the U.S. Congress
would follow the British lead. So they attacked the tar-
iff,  both  to  lower  rates  and  to  discourage  the  use  of
federal power to attack slavery.

The  crisis  began  in  1832,  when  high-tariff  con-
gressmen  ignored  southern  warnings  that  they  were
“endangering  the  Union”  and  reenacted  the  Tariff  of
Abominations. In response, leading South Carolinians
called  a  state  convention,  which  in  November  boldly
adopted an Ordinance of Nullification declaring the tar-
iffs of 1828 and 1832 to be null and void. The ordinance

President Andrew Jackson, 1830

The new president came to Washington with a well-
deserved reputation as an aggressive Indian ﬁghter
and unpredictable military leader. In this ofﬁcial portrait,
Jackson looks “presidential” — his dress and posture, and
the artist’s composition, conveyed an image of a calm,
deliberate statesman. Subsequent events would show
that Jackson had not lost his hard-edged authoritarian
personality. Library of Congress.

then  chief  justice  of  the  Supreme  Court;  and  Martin
Van Buren, whom Jackson named secretary of state.

Following  Van  Buren’s  example  in  New  York,
Jackson used patronage to create a disciplined national
party. He rejected the idea of “property in office” (that
a  qualified  official  held  a  position  permanently)  and
insisted  on  a  rotation  of  officeholders  when  a  new
administration took power. Rotation would not lessen
expertise, Jackson insisted, because public duties were
“so  plain  and  simple  that  men  of  intelligence  may
readily  qualify  themselves  for  their  performance.”
William  L.  Marcy,  a  New  York  Jacksonian,  offered  a
more  realistic  explanation  for  rotation:  government
jobs  were  like  the  spoils  of  war,  and  “to  the  victor
belong  the  spoils  of  the  enemy.”  Jackson  used  those
spoils  to  reward  his  allies  and  win  backing  for  his
policies.

