324

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
How did South Carolina
justify nulliﬁcation on
constitutional grounds?

prohibited the collection of those
duties  in  South  Carolina  after
February 1, 1833, and threatened
secession  if  federal  officials  tried
to collect them.

South Carolina’s act of nullifi-
cation — the argument that a state has the right to void,
within its borders, a law passed by Congress — rested
on  the  constitutional  arguments  developed  in  The
South Carolina Exposition and Protest (1828). Written
anonymously by Vice President John C. Calhoun, the
Exposition gave a localist (or sectional) interpretation
to the federal union. Because each state or geographic
region had  distinct  interests,  localists  argued,  protec-
tive tariffs and other national legislation that operated
unequally  on  the  various  states  lacked  fairness  and
legitimacy — in  fact,  they  were  unconstitutional.  An
obsessive  defender  of  the  interests  of  southern  slave
owners, Calhoun exaggerated the frequency and sever-
ity of such legislation, declaring, “Constitutional gov-
ernment and the government of a majority are utterly
incompatible.”

Calhoun’s  constitutional  doctrines  reflected  the
arguments  advanced  by  Jefferson  and  Madison  in
the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions of 1798. Those

Who Will Be Jackson’s Heir?

Elected vice president in 1828, John C. Calhoun hoped
to succeed Jackson in the White House. He failed to
account for the ambition of Martin Van Buren, who
managed Jackson’s campaign and claimed the prized
ofﬁce of secretary of state. When Van Buren resigned
as secretary in 1831 and Jackson nominated him as
minister to Britain, Calhoun sought to destroy his rival
by blocking his conﬁrmation in the Senate. The “Little
Magician” pounced on this miscalculation, persuading
Jackson, already disillusioned by Calhoun’s support for
nulliﬁcation, to oust him from the ticket. Van Buren
took his place as vice president in 1832, carried into
the ofﬁce — as the cartoonist tells the tale — on
Jackson’s back, and succeeded to the presidency in
1836. © Collection of the New-York Historical Society.

resolutions asserted that, because state-based conven-
tions  had  ratified  the  Constitution,  sovereignty  lay
in  the  states,  not  in  the  people.  Beginning  from  this
premise, Calhoun argued that a state convention could
declare a congressional law to be void within the state’s
borders. Replying to this states’ rights interpretation of
the Constitution, which had little support in the text of
the document, Senator Daniel Webster of Massachusetts
presented  a  nationalist  interpretation  that  celebrated
popular  sovereignty  and  Congress’s  responsibility  to
secure the “general welfare.”

Jackson  hoped  to  find  a  middle  path  between
Webster’s  strident  nationalism  and  Calhoun’s  radical
doctrine of localist federalism. The Constitution clearly
gave the federal government the authority to establish
tariffs,  and  Jackson  vowed  to  enforce  it.  He  declared
that  South  Carolina’s  Ordinance  of  Nullification  vio-
lated the letter of the Constitution and was “destructive
of  the  great  object  for  which  it  was  formed.”  More
pointedly,  he  warned,  “Disunion  by  armed  force  is
treason.” At Jackson’s request, Congress in early 1833
passed a military Force Bill, authorizing the president
to compel South Carolina’s obedience to national laws.
Simultaneously,  Jackson  addressed  the  South’s  objec-
tions to high import duties with a new tariff act that,

