CHAPTER 10

  A Democratic Revolution, 1800–1844

325

The Great Webster-Hayne Debate, 1830

The “Tariff of Abominations” sparked one of the great debates in American history. When Senator Robert Y.
Hayne of South Carolina (seated in the middle of the picture, with his legs crossed) opposed the federal
tariffs by invoking the doctrines of states’ rights and nulliﬁcation, Daniel Webster rose to the defense of the
Union. Speaking for two days to a spellbound Senate, Webster delivered an impassioned oration that cele-
brated the unity of the American people as the key to their freedom. His parting words — “Liberty and
Union, now and forever, one and inseparable!” — quickly became part of the national memory. “Webster’s
Reply to Haynes,” by G.P.A. Healy, City of Boston Art Commission.

over the course of a decade, reduced rates to the mod-
est  levels  of  1816.  Subsequently,  export-hungry  mid-
western  wheat  farmers  joined  southern  planters  in
advocating low duties to avoid retaliatory tariffs by for-
eign nations. “Illinois wants a market for her agricul-
tural  products,”  declared  Senator  Sidney  Breese  in
1846. “[S]he wants the market of the world.”

Having won the political battle by securing a tariff
reduction, the South Carolina convention did not press
its  constitutional  stance  on  nullification.  Jackson  was
satisfied. He had assisted the South economically while
upholding  the  constitutional  principle  of  national
authority — a  principle  that  Abraham  Lincoln  would
embrace to defend the Union during the secession cri-
sis of 1861.

The Bank War
In the midst of the tariff crisis, Jackson faced a major
challenge from politicians who supported the Second
Bank of the United States. Founded in Philadelphia in

1816 (Chapter 7), the bank was privately managed and
operated under a twenty-year charter from the federal
government, which owned 20 percent of its stock. The
bank’s most important role was to stabilize the nation’s
money supply, which consisted primarily of notes and
bills  of  credit — in  effect,  paper  money — issued  by
state-chartered  banks.  Those  banks  promised  to
redeem the notes on demand with “hard” money (or
“specie”) — that  is,  gold  or  silver  coins  minted  by  the
U.S. or foreign governments — but there were few coins
in circulation. By collecting those notes and regularly
demanding  specie,  the  Second  Bank  kept  the  state
banks from issuing too much paper money and depre-
ciating its value.

This cautious monetary policy pleased creditors —
the  bankers  and  entrepreneurs  in  Boston,  New  York,
and Philadelphia, whose capital investments were under-
writing economic development. However, expansion-
minded  bankers,  including  friends  of  Jackson’s  in
Nashville,  demanded  an  end  to  central  oversight.
Moreover, many ordinary Americans worried that the

