326

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Second Bank would force weak banks to close, leaving
them holding worthless paper notes. Many politicians
resented the arrogance of the bank’s president, Nicholas
Biddle.  “As  to  mere  power,”  Biddle  boasted,  “I  have
been  for  years  in  the  daily  exercise  of  more  personal
authority than any President habitually enjoys.”

Jackson’s  Bank  Veto  Although  the  Second  Bank
had  many  enemies,  a  political  miscalculation  by  its
friends brought its downfall. In 1832, Henry Clay and
Daniel  Webster  persuaded  Biddle  to  seek  an  early
extension  of  the  bank’s  charter  (which  still  had  four
years to run). They had the votes in Congress to enact
the required legislation and hoped to lure Jackson into
a veto that would split the Democrats just before the
1832 elections.

Jackson turned the tables on Clay and Webster. He
vetoed the rechartering bill with a masterful message
that blended constitutional arguments with class rhet-
oric and patriotic fervor. Adopting the position taken
by  Thomas  Jefferson  in  1793,  Jackson  declared  that
Congress had no constitutional authority to charter a
national bank. He condemned the bank as “subversive
of the rights of the States,” “dangerous to the liberties of
the people,” and a privileged monopoly that promoted
“the advancement of the few at the expense of . . . farm-
ers,  mechanics,  and  laborers.”  Finally,  the  president
noted that British aristocrats owned much of the bank’s
stock.  Such  a  powerful  institution  should  be  “purely
American,” Jackson declared with patriotic zeal.

Jackson’s attack on the bank carried him to victory
in  1832.  Old  Hickory  and  Martin  Van  Buren,  his
new  running  mate,  overwhelmed  Henry  Clay,  who
headed  the  National  Republican  ticket,  by  219  to
49  electoral  votes.  Jackson’s  most  fervent  supporters
were eastern workers and western farmers, who blamed
the  Second  Bank  for  high  urban  prices  and  stagnant
farm income. “All the flourishing cities of the West are
mortgaged  to  this  money  power,”  charged  Senator
Thomas  Hart  Benton,  a  Jacksonian  from  Missouri.
Still, many of Jackson’s supporters had prospered dur-
ing a decade of strong economic growth. Thousands of
middle-class  Americans — lawyers,  clerks,  shopkeep-
ers, and artisans — had used the opportunity to rise in
the  world  and  cheered  Jackson’s  attack  on  privileged
corporations.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
Why — and how — did
Jackson destroy the
Second National Bank?

The  Bank  Destroyed  Early
in  1833,  Jackson  met  their
wishes  by  appointing  Roger  B.
Taney,  a  strong  opponent  of
corporate  privilege,  as  head  of

the Treasury Department. Taney promptly transferred
the  federal  government’s  gold  and  silver  from  the
Second  Bank  to  various  state  banks,  which  critics
labeled  Jackson’s  “pet  banks.”  To  justify  this  abrupt
(and  probably  illegal)  transfer,  Jackson  declared  that
his reelection represented “the decision of the people
against the bank” and gave him a mandate to destroy it.
This sweeping claim of presidential power was new and
radical. Never before had a president claimed that vic-
tory at the polls allowed him to pursue a controversial
policy or to act independently of Congress (American
Voices, p. 328).

The  “bank  war”  escalated  into  an  all-out  political
battle.  In  March  1834,  Jackson’s  opponents  in  the
Senate  passed  a  resolution  composed  by  Henry  Clay
that  censured  the  president  and  warned  of  executive
tyranny: “We are in the midst of a revolution, hitherto
bloodless, but rapidly descending towards a total change
of  the  pure  republican  character  of  the  Government,
and the concentration of all power in the hands of one
man.”  Clay’s  charges  and  Congress’s  censure  did  not
deter Jackson. “The Bank is trying to kill me but I will
kill it,” he vowed to Van Buren. And so he did. When
the  Second  Bank’s  national  charter  expired  in  1836,
Jackson prevented its renewal.

Jackson had destroyed both national banking — the
handiwork of Alexander Hamilton — and the American
System of protective tariffs and public works created by
Henry Clay and John Quincy Adams. The result was a
profound check on economic activism and innovative
policymaking  by  the  national  government.  “All  is
gone,”  observed  a  Washington  newspaper  correspon-
dent. “All is gone, which the General Government was
instituted to create and preserve.”

Indian Removal
The status of Native American peoples posed an equally
complex  political  problem.  By  the  late  1820s,  white
voices throughout the South and Midwest demanded
the  resettlement  of  Indian  peoples  west  of  the  Mis-
sissippi  River.  Many  whites  who  were  sympathetic  to
Native Americans also favored resettlement. Removal
to  the  West  seemed  the  only  way  to  protect  Indians
from  alcoholism,  financial  exploitation,  and  cultural
decline.

However, most Indians did not want to leave their
ancestral  lands.  For  centuries,  Cherokees  and  Creeks
had lived in Georgia, Tennessee, and Alabama; Chick-
asaws and Choctaws in Mississippi and Alabama; and
Seminoles in Florida. During the War of 1812, Andrew
Jackson had forced the Creeks to relinquish millions of

