acres, but Indian tribes still controlled vast tracts and
wanted to keep them.

Cherokee  Resistance  But  on  what  terms?  Some
Indians  had  adopted  white  ways.  An  1825  census
revealed  that  various  Cherokees  owned  33  gristmills,
13  sawmills,  2,400  spinning  wheels,  760  looms,  and
2,900 plows. Many of these owners were mixed-race,
the offspring of white traders and Indian women. They
had grown up in a bicultural world, knew the political
and economic ways of whites, and often favored assim-
ilation into white society. Indeed, some of these mixed-
race  people  were  indistinguishable  from  southern
planters. At his death in 1809, Georgia Cherokee James
Vann  owned  one  hundred  black  slaves,  two  trading
posts, and a gristmill. Three decades later, forty other
mixed-blood  Cherokee  families  each  owned  ten  or
more African American workers.

Prominent  mixed-race  Cherokees  believed  that
integration into American life was the best way to pro-
tect  their  property  and  the  lands  of  their  people.  In
1821,  Sequoyah,  a  part-Cherokee  silversmith,  per-
fected a system of writing for the Cherokee language;
six  years  later,  mixed-race  Cherokees  devised  a  new
charter of Cherokee government modeled directly on
the U.S. Constitution. “You asked us to throw off the
hunter and warrior state,” Cherokee John Ridge told a
Philadelphia audience in 1832. “We did so. You asked
us to form a republican government: We did so. . . . You
asked us to learn to read: We did so. You asked us to
cast away our idols, and worship your God: We did so.”
Full-blood Cherokees, who made up 90 percent of the
population, resisted many of these cultural and politi-
cal innovations but were equally determined to retain
their ancestral lands. “We would not receive money for
land in which our fathers and friends are buried,” one
full-blood chief declared. “We love our land; it is our
mother.”

What  the  Cherokees  did  or  wanted  carried  no
weight with the Georgia legislature. In 1802, Georgia
had given up its western land claims in return for a fed-
eral promise to extinguish Indian landholdings in the
state.  Now  it  demanded  fulfillment  of  that  pledge.
Having spent his military career fighting Indians and
seizing their lands, Andrew Jackson gave full support
to Georgia. On assuming the presidency, he withdrew
the federal troops that had protected Indian enclaves
there  and  in  Alabama  and  Mississippi.  The  states,  he
declared, were sovereign within their borders.

The Removal Act and Its Aftermath
Jackson then
pushed  the  Indian  Removal  Act  of  1830  through

CHAPTER 10

  A Democratic Revolution, 1800–1844

327

Congress over the determined opposition of evangeli-
cal  Protestant  men — and  women.  To  block  removal,
Catharine  Beecher  and  Lydia  Sigourney  composed  a
Ladies Circular, which urged “benevolent ladies” to use
“prayers and exertions to avert the calamity of removal.”
Women from across the nation flooded Congress with
petitions. Nonetheless, Jackson’s bill squeaked through
the House of Representatives by a vote of 102 to 97.

The  Removal  Act  created  the  Indian  Territory  on
national lands acquired in the Louisiana Purchase and
located in present-day Oklahoma and Kansas. It prom-
ised  money  and  reserved  land  to  Native  American
peoples  who  would  give  up  their  ancestral  holdings
east  of  the  Mississippi  River.  Government  officials
promised the Indians that they could live on their new
land, “they and all their children, as long as grass grows
and water runs.” However, as one Indian leader noted,
on the Great Plains “water and timber are scarcely to be
seen.” When Chief Black Hawk and his Sauk and Fox

Blackhawk

This portrait of Black Hawk (1767–1838), by George Catlin,
shows the Indian leader holding his namesake, a black hawk
and its feathers. When Congress approved Andrew Jackson’s
Indian Removal Act in 1830, Black Hawk mobilized Sauk and
Fox warriors to protect their ancestral lands in Illinois. “It was
here, that I was born — and here lie the bones of many
friends and relatives,” the aging chief declared. “I . . . never
could consent to leave it.” Courtesy Warner Collection of Gulf
States Paper Corporation, Tuscaloosa, AL.

