A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

The Character and

Goals of Andrew

Jackson

From the start of his career, Andrew Jackson was a controversial ﬁgure. “Hot-
tempered,”  “Indian-hater,”  “military  despot,”  said  his  critics,  while  his  friends
praised him as a forthright statesman. His contemporary biographer, the jour-
nalist James Parton, found him a man of many faces, an enigma. Others thought
they understood his personality and policies: James Hamilton, a loyal Jacksonian
congressman, recalled Jackson’s volatile temper. Henry Clay, his archrival, warned
that  Jackson’s  quest  for  power  threatened  American  republicanism,  while
wealthy New York Whig Philip Hone accused him of inciting class warfare. After
talking  with  dozens  of  Americans,  Frenchman  Alexis  de  Tocqueville  offered  a
balanced interpretation of the man and his goals.

James Parton
Preface to The Life of Andrew
Jackson (1860)

If any one . . . had asked what I had yet discovered respect-
ing General Jackson, I might have answered thus: “Andrew
Jackson, I am given to understand, was a patriot and a
traitor. He was one of the greatest of generals, and wholly
ignorant of the art of war. . . . The first of statesmen, he
never devised, he never framed a measure. He was the
most candid of men, and was capable of the profoundest
dissimulation. A most law-defying, law-obeying citizen.
A stickler for discipline, he never hesitated to disobey his
superior. A democratic autocrat. An urbane savage. An
atrocious saint.”

James Hamilton Jr.
Recalling an Event in 1827, as Jackson
Campaigns for the Presidency

The steamer Pocahontas was chartered by citizens of New
Orleans to convey the General and his party from Nash-
ville to that city. She was fitted out in the most sumptuous
manner. The party was General and Mrs. Jackson, . . .
Governor Samuel Houston, Wm. B. Lewis, Robert
Armstrong, and others. . . . The only freight was the
General’s cotton-crop. . . .

In the course of the voyage an event occurred, which

I repeat, as it is suggestive of [his] character. A steamer
of greater speed than ours, going in the same direction,
passed us, crossed our bow; then stopped and let us pass
her and then passed us again in triumph. This was repeated
again and again, until the General, being excited by the
offensive course, ordered a rifle to be brought to him;
hailed the pilot of the other steamer, and swore that if he
did the same thing again he would shoot him.

Philip Hone
Ruminating in His Diary on the
Jacksonians’ Victory in the New York
Elections of 1834

I apprehend that Mr. Van Buren [Jackson’s vice president]
and his friends have no permanent cause of triumph in
their victory. They . . . have mounted a vicious horse,
who, taking the bit in his mouth, will run away with
[them]. . . . This battle had been fought upon the ground
of the poor against the rich, and this unworthy prejudice,
this dangerous delusion, has been encouraged by the
leaders of the triumphant party, and fanned into a flame
by the polluted breath of the hireling press in their
employ. . . .

The cry of “Down with the aristocracy!” mingled
with the shouts of victory. . . . They have succeeded in
raising this dangerous spirit [of the mob], and have
gladly availed themselves of its support to accomplish a
temporary object; but can they allay it at pleasure? . . .
Eighteen thousand men in New York have voted for
the high-priest of the party whose professed design is
to bring down the property, the talents, the industry,
the steady habits of that class which constituted the real
strength of the Commonwealth, to the common level of
the idle, the worthless, and the unenlightened. Look to it,
ye men of respectability in the Jackson party, are ye not
afraid of the weapons ye have used in this warfare?

Henry Clay
Introducing a Senate Resolution Censuring
Jackson, December 26, 1833

We are in the midst of a revolution, hitherto bloodless,
but rapidly tending toward a total change of the pure
republican character of the government, and to the

328

