concentration of all power in the hands of one man. The
powers of Congress are paralyzed, except when exerted
in conformity with his will, by frequent and an extraordi-
nary exercise of the executive veto, not anticipated by the
founders of our Constitution, and not practiced by any
of the predecessors of the present chief magistrate. . . .
The judiciary has not been exempt from the pre-
vailing rage for innovation. Decisions of the tribunals,
deliberately pronounced, have been contemptuously
disregarded. . . . Our Indian relations, coeval with
the existence of the government, and recognized and
established by numerous laws and treaties, have been
subverted. . . . The system of protection of improvement
lies crushed beneath the veto. The system of protection of
American industry [will soon meet a similar fate]. . . . In a
term of eight years, a little more than equal to that which
was required to establish our liberties [as an independent
republic between 1776 and 1783], the government will
have been transformed into an elective monarchy — the
worst of all forms of government.

been imagined that General Jackson is bent on establish-
ing a dictatorship in America, introducing a military
spirit, and giving a degree of influence to the central
authority that cannot but be dangerous to provincial
[state] liberties. . . .

Far from wishing to extend the Federal power, the

President belongs to the party which is desirous of
limiting that power to the clear and precise letter of
the Constitution and which never puts a construction
upon that act favorable to the government of the Union;
far from standing forth as the champion of centralization,
General Jackson is the agent of the state jealousies; and
he was placed in his lofty station by the passions that are
most opposed to the central government.

Sources: James Parton, The Life of Andrew Jackson. In Three Volumes (New York: Mason
Brothers, 1860), vol. 1, vii–viii; Sean Wilentz, ed., Major Problems in the Early Republic,
1787–1848 (Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath, 1991), 374 (Hamilton) and 392–393 (Hone);
Calvin Colton, ed., The Life . . . of Henry Clay, 6 vols. (New York: A. Barnes, 1857),
576–580; Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, abr. by Thomas Bender (New
York: Modern Library, 1981), 271–273.

Alexis de Tocqueville
Analysis of Jackson in Democracy
in America (1835)

We have been told that General Jackson has won battles;
that he is an energetic man, prone by nature and habit to
the use of force, covetous of power and a despot by incli-
nation.

All this may be true; but the inferences which have
been drawn from these truths are very erroneous. It has

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Was Jackson a “democratic autocrat,” as Parton puts

it? Would the authors of the other excerpts agree? Did
Jackson instigate class warfare, as Hone suggests?
2.  In your judgment, which writer, Clay or Tocqueville,

offers the more accurate assessment of Jackson and his
policies?

3.  Do you agree with Philip Hone’s view that the Jackso-

nian Democrats mobilized “poor against the rich”? What
evidence would support or contradict Hone’s assertion?

329

