330

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did the views of
Jackson and John Marshall
differ regarding the sta-
tus and rights of Indian
peoples?

followers  refused  to  leave  rich,
well-watered farmland in western
Illinois  in  1832,  Jackson  sent
troops  to  expel  them  by  force.
Eventually,  the  U.S.  Army  pur-
sued  Black  Hawk
the
Wisconsin  Territory  and,  in  the
eight-hour  Bad  Axe
brutal
Massacre,  killed  850  of  his  1,000  warriors.  Over  the
next five years, American diplomatic pressure and mil-
itary power forced seventy Indian peoples to sign trea-
ties and move west of the Mississippi (Map 10.3).

into

In  the  meantime,  the  Cherokees  had  carried  the
defense  of  their  lands  to  the  Supreme  Court,  where

they  claimed  the  status  of  a  “foreign  nation.”  In
Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831), Chief Justice John
Marshall  denied  that  claim  and  declared  that  Indian
peoples were “domestic dependent nations.” However,
in Worcester v. Georgia (1832), Marshall and the Court
sided  with  the  Cherokees  against  Georgia.  Voiding
Georgia’s extension of state law over the Cherokees, the
Court held that Indian nations were “distinct political
communities,  having  territorial  boundaries,  within
which their authority is exclusive [and is] guaranteed
by the United States.”

Instead  of  guaranteeing  the  Cherokees’  territory,
the  U.S.  government  took  it  from  them.  In  1835,
American  officials  and  a  minority  Cherokee  faction

UNORGANIZED
TERRITORY

PlatteR.

DELAWARE & WYANDOT

WEA & PIANKASHAW
PEORIA & KASKASKIA

Arkansas R.

L.Huro

n

CANADA
L.Ontario

N.Y.

VT.

N.H.

MASS.

IOWA
TERRITORY

Missouri R.

PAWNEE

OMAHA

Council
Bluffs

OTO &
MISSOURI

Ft. Snelling
(cid:9)

SAUK
WISCONSIN
TERRITORY
FOX

(cid:9)

Ft. Crawford

MississippiR.
WINNEBAGO,FOX,SAUK

IOWA

KICKAPOO
(cid:2)

PAWNEE

(cid:9)
St. Joseph
MO.
(cid:9)
POTAWATOMI
Ft. Leavenworth

(cid:2)

Rock Island

(cid:2)
ILLINOIS

Quincy

WEA
St Louis

(cid:2)

PIANKASHAW

OTTAWA

n
a
g
i
h
c
i

M
.
L

O
G
A
B
E
N

WIN

MICH.

MIAMI

L.Erie

MIAMI

TAWA
OT

IROQUOIS

OHIO

POTAWATOMI
IROQUOIS

OSAGE

CHEROKEE
OUTLET

CREEK

SEMINOLE

CHICKASAW

MIAMI
CHEROKEE
QUAPAW
(cid:2)

Springfield

CHEROKEE
(cid:9)(cid:9)
Ft. Coffee Ft. Smith
CHOCTAW

ARK.

Little
Rock

(cid:2)

CHEROKEE

(cid:2)
Nashville

TENN.

(cid:2)

Memphis
CHICKASAW

ALA.

Red R.

CHOCTAW

CREEK

CHEROKEE

(cid:2)

New Echota

GEORGIA

(cid:9)

Fort Mitchell

(cid:2)

Montgomery

IND.

OhioR.

VIRGINIA

KY.

CONN.

R.I.

PA.

N.J.

MD.

DEL.

N

W

E

S

NORTH
CAROLINA

S.C.

REPUBLIC OF TEXAS
(1836–1846)

Fort Jesup

(cid:9)

LA.

MEXICO

K
E
E
R
C
(cid:2)

MISS.

Mobile

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

FLA.

Ceded lands

Indian reservations

Routes of Indian removal

(cid:9)

United States forts

State and territory
boundaries in 1846

(cid:2)
New Orleans

Gulf of Mexico

SEMINOLE

SEMINOLE

0

0

200

400 miles

200

400 kilometers

(after Tanner)

MAP 10.3
The Removal of Native Americans, 1820–1846

As white settlers moved west, the U.S. government forced scores of Native American peoples to
leave their ancestral lands. Andrew Jackson’s Indian Removal Act of 1830 formalized this policy.
Subsequently, scores of Indian peoples signed treaties that exchanged their lands in the East,
Midwest, and Southeast for money and designated reservations in an Indian Territory west of
the Mississippi River. When the Sauk, Fox, Cherokees, and Seminoles resisted resettlement, the
government used the U.S. Army to enforce the removal policy.

