CHAPTER 10

  A Democratic Revolution, 1800–1844

331

Raising Public Opinion Against the Seminoles

During the eighteenth century, hundreds of enslaved Africans ﬂed South Carolina and Georgia and found
refuge in Spanish Florida, where they lived among and intermarried with the Seminole people. This color
engraving from the 1830s — showing red and black Seminoles butchering respectable white fami-
lies — sought to bolster political support for the removal of the Seminoles to Indian Territory. By the
mid-1840s, after a decade of warfare, the U.S. Army had forced 2,500 Seminoles to migrate to Oklahoma.
However, another 2,500 Seminoles continued to ﬁght and eventually won a new treaty allowing them to live
in Florida. The Granger Collection, New York.

negotiated the Treaty of New Echota, which specified
that  Cherokees  would  resettle  in  Indian  Territory.
When only 2,000 of 17,000 Cherokees had moved by
the  May  1838  deadline,  President  Martin  Van  Buren
ordered  General  Winfield  Scott  to  enforce  the  treaty.
Scott’s army rounded up 14,000 Cherokees (including
mixed-race  African  Cherokees)  and  marched  them
1,200 miles, an arduous journey that became known as
the Trail of Tears. Along the way, 3,000 Indians died of
starvation  and  exposure.  Once  in  Oklahoma,  the
Cherokees excluded anyone of “negro or mulatto par-
entage”  from  governmental  office,  thereby  affirming
that full citizenship in their nation was racially defined.
Just as the United States was a “white man’s country,” so
Indian  Territory  would  be  defined  as  a  “red  man’s
country.”

Encouraged by generous gifts of land, the Creeks,
Chickasaws,  and  Choctaws  moved  west  of  the
Mississippi,  leaving  the  Seminoles  in  Florida  as  the
only numerically significant Indian people remaining
in  the  Southeast.  Government  pressure  persuaded
about  half  of  the  Seminoles  to  migrate  to  Indian
Territory, but families whose ancestors had intermar-
ried with runaway slaves feared the emphasis on “blood
purity” there. During the 1840s, they fought a success-
ful  guerrilla  war  against  the  U.S.  Army  and  retained
their  lands  in  central  Florida.  These  Seminoles  were
the exception: the Jacksonians had forced the removal
of most eastern Indian peoples.

The Jacksonian Impact
Jackson’s legacy, like that of every other great president,
is  complex  and  rich.  On  the  institutional  level,  he
expanded the authority of the nation’s chief executive.
As Jackson put it, “The President is the direct represen-
tative  of  the  American  people.”  Assuming  that  role
during  the  nullification  crisis,  he  upheld  national
authority by threatening the use of military force, lay-
ing the foundation for Lincoln’s defense of the Union a
generation later. At the same time (and somewhat con-
tradictorily), Jackson curbed the reach of the national
government. By undermining Henry Clay’s American
System  of  national  banking,  protective  tariffs,  and
internal  improvements,  Jackson  reinvigorated  the
Jeffersonian  tradition  of  a  limited  and  frugal  central
government.

The Taney Court
Jackson also undermined the con-
stitutional jurisprudence of John Marshall by appoint-
ing  Roger  B.  Taney  as  his  successor  in  1835.  During
his  long  tenure  as  chief  justice  (1835–1864),  Taney
partially reversed the nationalist and vested-property-
rights decisions of the Marshall Court and gave consti-
tutional legitimacy to Jackson’s policies of states’ rights
and free enterprise. In the landmark case Charles River
Bridge Co. v. Warren Bridge Co. (1837), Taney declared
that  a  legislative  charter — in  this  case,  to  build  and
operate  a  toll  bridge — did  not  necessarily  bestow  a

