332

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

monopoly, and that a legislature could charter a com-
peting bridge to promote the general welfare: “While
the rights of private property are sacredly guarded, we
must  not  forget  that  the  community  also  has  rights.”
This decision directly challenged Marshall’s interpreta-
tion  of  the  contract  clause  of  the  Constitution  in
Dartmouth  College  v.  Woodward  (1819),  which  had
stressed the binding nature of public charters and the
sanctity of “vested rights” (Chapter 7). By limiting the
property claims of existing canal and turnpike compa-
nies,  Taney’s  decision  allowed  legislatures  to  charter
competing  railroads  that  would  provide  cheaper  and
more efficient transportation.

in . . . government,” declared a New Jersey Democrat,
“it  is  the  danger  of  associated  wealth,  with  special
privileges.”  The  revised  constitutions  also  protected
taxpayers  by  setting  strict  limits  on  state  debt  and
encouraging  judges  to  enforce  them.  Said  New  York
reformer Michael Hoffman, “We will not trust the leg-
islature  with  the  power  of  creating  indefinite  mort-
gages on the people’s property.”

“The world is governed too much,” the Jacksonians
proclaimed  as  they  embraced  a  small-government,
laissez-faire outlook and celebrated the power of ordi-
nary people to make decisions in the voting booth and
the marketplace.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the Taney Court
and the Jacksonian state
constitutions alter the
American legal and consti-
tutional system?

The Taney Court also limited Marshall’s nationalis-
tic interpretation of the commerce clause by enhancing
the regulatory role of state governments. For example,
in Mayor of New York v. Miln (1837), the Taney Court
ruled  that  New  York  State  could
use  its  “police  power”  to  inspect
the health of arriving immigrants.
The  Court  also  restored  to  the
states some of the economic pow-
ers they had exercised prior to the
Constitution of 1787. In Briscoe v.
Bank of Kentucky (1837), the jus-
tices allowed a bank owned by the
state of Kentucky to issue currency, despite the word-
ing of Article 1, Section 10 of the Constitution, which
prohibits states from issuing “bills of credit.”

States  Revise  Their  Constitutions
Inspired  by
Jackson  and  Taney,  Democrats  in  the  various  states
mounted their own constitutional revolutions. Between
1830  and  1860,  twenty  states  called  conventions  that
furthered  democratic  principles  by  reapportioning
state legislatures on the basis of population and giving
the vote to all white men. Voters also had more power
because  the  new  documents  mandated  the  election,
rather than the appointment, of most public officials,
including sheriffs, justices of the peace, and judges.

The new constitutions also embodied the principles
of classical  liberalism, or laissez-faire, by limiting the
government’s role in the economy. (Twentieth-century
social-welfare  liberalism  endorses  the  opposite  prin-
ciple: that government should intervene in economic
and  social  life.)  As  president,  Jackson  had  destroyed
the American System, and his disciples now attacked
the  state-based  Commonwealth  System,  which  used
chartered corporations and state funds to promote eco-
nomic  development.  Most  Jackson-era  constitutions
prohibited states from granting special charters to cor-
porations and extending loans and credit guarantees to
private businesses. “If there is any danger to be feared

Class, Culture, and the
Second Party System
The  rise  of  the  Democracy  and  Jackson’s  tumultuous
presidency sparked the creation in the mid-1830s of a
second  national  party:  the  Whigs.  For  the  next  two
decades, Whigs and Democrats competed fiercely for
votes and appealed to different cultural groups. Many
evangelical  Protestants  became  Whigs,  while  most
Catholic immigrants and traditional Protestants joined
the Democrats. By debating issues of economic policy,
class power, and moral reform, party politicians offered
Americans a choice between competing programs and
political leaders. “Of the two great parties,” remarked
philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson, “[the Democracy]
has the best cause . . . for free trade, for wide suffrage,
[but the Whig Party] has the best men.”

The Whig Worldview
The Whig Party arose in 1834, when a group of con-
gressmen contested Andrew Jackson’s policies and his
high-handed, “kinglike” conduct. They took the name
Whigs to identify themselves with the pre-Revolutionary
American  and  British  parties — also  called  Whigs —
that had opposed the arbitrary actions of British mon-
archs. The Whigs accused “King Andrew I” of violating
the Constitution by creating a spoils system and under-
mining elected legislators, whom they saw as the true
representatives  of  the  sovereign  people.  One  Whig
accused Jackson of ruling in a manner “more absolute
than that of any absolute monarchy of Europe.”

Initially,  the  Whigs  consisted  of  political  factions
with  distinct  points  of  view.  However,  guided  by
Senators Webster of Massachusetts, Clay of Kentucky,
and Calhoun of South Carolina, they gradually coalesced
into  a  party  with  a  distinctive  stance  and  coherent

