ideology. Like the Federalists of the 1790s, the Whigs
wanted a political world dominated by men of ability
and wealth; unlike the Federalists, they advocated an
elite based on talent, not birth.

The  Whigs  celebrated  the  entrepreneur  and  the
enterprising individual: “This is a country of self-made
men,” they boasted, pointing to the relative absence of
permanent distinctions of class and status among white
citizens. Embracing the Industrial Revolution, north-
ern  Whigs  welcomed  the  investments  of  “moneyed
capitalists,”  which  provided  workers  with  jobs  and
“bread, clothing and homes.” Indeed, Whig congress-
man  Edward  Everett  championed  a  “holy  alliance”
among laborers, owners, and governments and called
for a return to Henry Clay’s American System. Many
New England and Pennsylvania textile and iron work-
ers  shared  Everett’s  vision  because  they  benefitted
directly from protective tariffs.

Calhoun’s  Dissent  Support  for  the  Whigs  in  the
South — less widespread than that in the North — rested
on the appeal of specific policies and politicians. Some
southern Whigs were wealthy planters who invested in
railroads and banks or sold their cotton to New York
merchants. But the majority were yeomen whites who
resented the power and policies of low-country plant-
ers, most of whom were Democrats. In addition, some
Virginia and South Carolina Democrats, such as John
Tyler, became Whigs because they condemned Andrew
Jackson’s crusade against nullification.

Southern  Whigs  rejected  their  party’s  enthusiasm
for high tariffs and social mobility, and John C. Calhoun
was  their  spokesman.  Extremely  conscious  of  class
divisions  in  society,  Calhoun  believed  that  northern
Whigs’ rhetoric of equal opportunity was contradicted
not only by slavery, which he considered a fundamen-
tal  American  institution,  but  also  by  the  wage-labor
system  of  industrial  capitalism.  “There  is  and  always
has been in an advanced state of wealth and civilization
a conflict between labor and capital,” Calhoun declared
in 1837. He urged slave owners and factory owners to
unite against their common foe: the working class of
enslaved blacks and propertyless whites.

Most  northern  Whigs  rejected  Calhoun’s  class-
conscious social ideology. “A  clear and well-defined line
between capital and labor” might fit the slave South or
class-ridden Europe, Daniel Webster conceded, but in
the North “this distinction grows less and less definite
as  commerce  advances.”  Ignoring  the  ever-increasing
numbers of propertyless immigrants and native-born
wageworkers, Webster focused on the growing size of
the  middle  class,  whose  members  generally  favored
Whig  candidates.  In  the  election  of  1834,  the  Whigs

CHAPTER 10

  A Democratic Revolution, 1800–1844

333

John C. Calhoun (1782–1850)

This daguerreotype, made close to the time of Calhoun’s
death, suggests his emotional intensity and thwarted
ambition. The prime advocate of the doctrines of nulli-
ﬁcation and states’ rights, a founder of the Whig Party,
and a steadfast defender of slavery, Calhoun found his
lifelong pursuit of the presidency frustrated by Martin
Van Buren’s political skills and sectional divisions over
tariffs and slavery. © Image courtesy of the Gibbes Museum
of Art/Carolina Art Association.

took control of the House of Rep-
resentatives by appealing to evan-
gelical  Protest ants  and  upwardly
mobile
families — prosperous
farmers,  small-town  merchants,
and  skilled  industrial  workers  in
New England, New York, and the
new communities along the Great Lakes.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did the ideology
of the Whigs differ from
that of the Jacksonian
Democrats?

Anti-Masons Become Whigs  Many Whig voters in
1834  had  previously  supported  the  Anti-Masons,  a
powerful but short-lived party that formed in the late
1820s. As its name implies, Anti-Masons opposed the
Order of Freemasonry. Freemasonry began in Europe
as an organization of men seeking moral improvement
by promoting the welfare and unity of humanity. Many
Masons espoused republicanism, and the Order spread
rapidly  in  America  after  the  Revolution.  Its  ideology,
mysterious symbols, and semisecret character gave the
Order  an  air  of  exclusivity  that  attracted  ambitious
businessmen  and  political  leaders,  including  George
Washington, Henry Clay, and Andrew Jackson. In New

