334

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

York  State  alone  by  the  mid-1820s,  there  were  more
than 20,000 Masons, organized into 450 local lodges.
However, after the kidnapping and murder in 1826 of
William Morgan, a New York Mason who had threat-
ened to reveal the Order’s secrets, the Freemasons fell
into  disrepute. Thurlow  Weed,  a  newspaper  editor  in
Rochester,  New  York,  spearheaded  an  Anti-Masonic
Party,  which  condemned  the  Order  as  a  secret  aris-
tocratic  fraternity.  The  new  party  quickly  ousted
Freemasons  from  local  and  state  offices,  and  just  as
quickly ran out of political steam.

Because many Anti-Masons espoused temperance,
equality of opportunity, and evangelical morality, they
gravitated to the Whig Party. Throughout the Northeast
and  Midwest,  Whig  politicians  won  election  by  pro-
posing legal curbs on the sale of alcohol and local ordi-
nances that preserved Sunday as a day of worship. The
Whigs also secured the votes of farmers, bankers, and
shopkeepers,  who  favored  Henry  Clay’s  American
System. For these citizens of the growing Midwest, the
Whigs’  program  of  government  subsidies  for  roads,
canals,  and  bridges  was  as  important  as  their  moral
agenda.

In the election of 1836, the Whig Party faced Martin
Van Buren, the architect of the Democratic Party and
Jackson’s  handpicked  successor.  Like  Jackson,  Van
Buren  denounced  the  American  System  and  warned
that  its  revival  would  create  a  “consolidated  govern-
ment.” Positioning himself as a defender of individual
rights, Van Buren also condemned the efforts of Whigs
and moral reformers to enact state laws imposing tem-
perance and national laws abolishing slavery. “The gov-
ernment is best which governs least” became his motto
in economic, cultural, and racial matters.

To oppose Van Buren, the Whigs ran four candi-
dates,  each  with  a  strong  regional  reputation.  They
hoped  to  garner  enough  electoral  votes  to  throw  the
contest  into  the  House  of  Representatives.  However,
the Whig tally — 73 electoral votes collected by William
Henry  Harrison  of  Ohio,  26  by  Hugh  L.  White  of
Tennessee, 14 by Daniel Webster of Massachusetts, and
11 by W. P. Mangum of Georgia — fell far short of Van
Buren’s 170 votes. Still, the four Whigs won 49 percent
of the popular vote, showing that the party’s message of
economic and moral improvement had broad appeal.

Labor Politics and the Depression
of 1837–1843
As the Democrats battled Whigs on the national level,
they faced challenges from urban artisans and workers.
Between 1828 and 1833, artisans and laborers in fifteen

states formed Working Men’s Parties. “Past experience
teaches us that we have nothing to hope from the aris-
tocratic  orders  of  society,”  declared  the  New  York
Working  Men’s  Party.  It  vowed  “to  send  men  of  our
own description, if we can, to the Legislature at Albany.”
The  new  parties’  agenda  reflected  the  values  and
interests of ordinary urban workers. The Philadelphia
Working Men’s Party set out to secure “a just balance of
power . . . between all the various classes.” It called for
the abolition of private banks, chartered monopolies,
and debtors’ prisons, and it demanded universal public
education and a fair system of taxation (Thinking Like
a Historian, p. 336). It  won some victories, electing a
number of assemblymen and persuading the Pennsyl-
vania  legislature  in  1834  to  authorize  tax-supported
schools.  Elsewhere,  Working  Men’s  candidates  won
office  in  many  cities,  but  their  parties’  weakness  in
statewide contests soon took a toll. By the mid-1830s,
most politically active workers had joined the Demo-
cratic Party.

The Working Men’s Parties left a mixed legacy. They
mobilized craft workers and gave political expression
to  their  ideology  of  artisan  republicanism.  As  labor
intellectual Orestes Brownson defined their distinctive
vision, “All men will be independent proprietors, work-
ing  on  their  own  capitals,  on  their  own  farms,  or  in
their  own  shops.”  However,  this  emphasis  on  propri-
etorship inhibited alliances between the artisan-based
Working Men’s Parties and the rapidly increasing class
of dependent wage earners. As Joseph Weydemeyer, a
close friend of Karl Marx, reported from New York in
the  early  1850s,  many  American  craft  workers  “are
incipient bourgeois, and feel themselves to be such.”

Moreover,  the  Panic  of  1837  threw  the  American
economy — and  the  workers’  movement — into  disar-
ray. The panic began when the Bank of England tried to
boost the faltering British economy by sharply curtail-
ing the flow of money and credit to the United States.
Since 1822, British manufacturers had extended credit
to southern planters to expand cotton production, and
British investors had purchased millions of dollars of
the  canal  bonds  from  the  northern  states.  Suddenly
deprived  of  British  funds,  American  planters,  mer-
chants,  and canal  corporations had to  withdraw  gold
from  domestic  banks  to  pay  their  foreign  debts.
Moreover, British textile mills drastically reduced their
purchases of raw cotton, causing its price to plummet
from 20 cents a pound to 10 cents or less.

Falling  cotton  prices  and  the  drain  of  specie  to
Britain  set  off  a  financial  panic.  On  May  8,  the  Dry
Dock Bank of New York City ran out of specie, prompt-
ing  worried  depositors  to  withdraw  gold  and  silver

