CHAPTER 10

  A Democratic Revolution, 1800–1844

335

coins  from  other  banks.  Within  two  weeks,  every
American bank had stopped trading specie and called
in its loans, turning a financial panic into an economic
crisis.  “This  sudden  overthrow  of  the  commercial
credit”  had  a  “stunning  effect,”  observed  Henry  Fox,
the British minister in Washington. “The conquest of
the  land  by  a  foreign  power  could  hardly  have  pro-
duced a more general sense of humiliation and grief.”

To  stimulate  the  economy,  state  governments
increased  their  investments  in  canals  and  railroads.
However, as governments issued (or guaranteed) more
and more bonds to finance these ventures, they were
unable  to  pay  the  interest  charges,  sparking  a  severe
financial  crisis  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  in  1839.
Nine state governments defaulted on their debts, and
hard-pressed  European  lenders  cut  the  flow  of  new
capital to the United States.

The American economy fell into a deep depression.
By 1843, canal construction had dropped by 90 percent,
prices and wages had fallen by 50 percent, and unem-
ployment in seaports and industrial centers had reached
20  percent.  Bumper  crops  drove  down  cotton  prices,

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors led to the
demise of the Anti-
Masonic and Working
Men’s political parties?

pushing  hundreds  of  planters
and  merchants  into  bankruptcy.
Mini ster  Henry  Ward  Beecher
des cribed a land “filled with lam-
entation . . . its  inhabitants  wan-
dering
like  bereaved  citizens
among the ruins of an earthquake, mourning for chil-
dren, for houses crushed, and property buried forever.”
By  creating  a  surplus  of  unemployed  workers,
the  depression  completed  the  decline  of  the  union
movement and the Working Men’s Parties. In 1837, six
thousand  masons,  carpenters,  and  other  building-
trades workers lost their jobs in New York City, destroy-
ing their unions’ bargaining power. By 1843, most local
unions, all the national labor organizations, and all the
workers’ parties had disappeared.

“Tippecanoe and Tyler Too!”
Many  Americans  blamed  the  Democrats  for  the
depression  of  1837–1843.  They  criticized  Jackson  for
destroying the Second Bank and directing the Treasury

Hard Times

The Panic of 1837 struck hard at Americans of all social ranks. This anti-Democratic cartoon shows
unemployed workers turning to drink; women and children begging in the streets; and fearful deposi-
tors withdrawing funds as their banks collapse. As the plummeting hot-air balloon in the background
symbolizes, the rising “Glory” of an independent America was crashing to earth. © Museum of the City
of New York, USA/The Bridgeman Art Library.

