the laws and institutions that govern it. It compels public
office to give an account of itself. It strips off the veil of
secrecy from the machinery of power. . . . And when all
this is spread abroad in newspaper details . . . of a people
that can read; when the estimate is freely made, of what
the government tax levies upon the daily hoard, and upon
apparel, and upon every comfort of life, can it be doubted
that such a people will demand and obtain an influence in
affairs that so vitally concern it? This would be freedom.

5.  Judge Baker, sentencing hearing in the court

case against Mrs. Margaret Douglass of Norfolk,
Virginia, January 10, 1854. Southern whites consid-
ered the acquisition of literacy by blacks, whether
slave or free, as a public danger, especially after
the Nat Turner uprising in Southampton County,
Virginia, in 1831 (Chapter 11, p. 362). A Virginia
court sent Mrs. Margaret Douglass to jail for a
month “as an example to all others” for teaching
free black children to read so they might have
access to books on religion and morality.

There are persons, I believe, in our community, opposed
to the policy of the law in question. They profess to
believe that universal intellectual culture is necessary to
religious instruction and education, and that such culture
is suitable to a state of slavery. . . .

Such opinions in the present state of our society I
regard as manifestly mischievous. It is not true that our
slaves cannot be taught religious and moral duty, without
being able to read the Bible and use the pen. Intellectual
and religious instruction often go hand in hand, but the
latter may well be exist without the former; . . . among the
whites one-fou[r]th or more are entirely without a knowl-
edge of letters, [nonetheless,] respect for the law, and for
moral and religious conduct and behavior, are justly and
prope[r]ly appreciated and practiced. . . .

The first legislative provision upon this subject was
introduced in the year 1831, immediately succeeding the
bloody scenes of the memorable Southampton insurrec-
tion; and . . . was re-enacted with additional penalties in
the year 1848. . . . After these several and repeated recog-
nitions of the wisdom and propriety of the said act, it may
well be said that bold and open opposition to it [must be
condemned] . . . as a measure of self-preservation and
protection.

Sources: (1) “Religion and Social Reform,” the Gilder Lehrman Institute of American
History, gilderlehrman.org; (2) New York Legislature Documents, Vol. 34, No. 65, Part 1
(Albany, NY: J. B. Lyon Company, 1919), 60; (3) Catharine E. Beecher, Educational
Reminiscences and Suggestions (New York: J. D. Ford & Company, 1874), 127; (4) The
North American Review 36, no. 58 (January 1833); (5) “The Case of Mrs. Margaret
Douglass,” Africans in America, pbs.org.

6.  Working Men’s Party poster for immigrant voters,

New York, 1830.

Source: Joshua R. Greenberg, Advocating the Man.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  What arguments does the editorial in the Philadelphia

National Gazette (source 1) advance? How does Stevens
(source 2) reframe this argument?

2.  What does the letter from a former student of Beecher’s
(source 3) tell us about the links between educational
reform and other social movements, such as Sabbatari-
anism (p. 305)? How does it help us to understand the
fate of the “notables” and the “log cabin campaign” of
1840?

3.  What is the larger agenda of the author of source 4?

How is the argument here similar to, or different from,
that in sources 1 and 2?

4.  How does Judge Baker (source 5) justify the denial of

education to African Americans?

5.  What do the occupations of the Working Men’s Party
candidates suggest about its deﬁnition of “worker”
(source 6)? How does the political agenda of the party
relate to the arguments advanced in sources 2 and 4? To
present-day debates regarding the education of illegal
immigrants?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

As these selections indicate, the debate over education had
many facets. Did the power traditionally held by “notables”
rest on their access to private schooling? Should a demo-
cratic society ensure the literacy of citizen voters? Was reli-
gious instruction a telling argument for slave literacy? Using
these documents, your answers to the questions above, and
materials in Chapters 8 and 10, write an essay that discusses
public education, responsible citizenship, and social reform
in America between 1820 and 1860.

337

