338

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Department  in  1836  to  issue  the  Specie  Circular,  an
executive order that required the Treasury Department
to accept only gold and silver in payment for lands in
the  national  domain.  Critics  charged — mistakenly —
that  the  Circular  drained  so  much  specie  from  the
economy that it sparked the Panic of 1837. In fact (as
noted  above),  the  curtailing  of  credit  by  the  Bank  of
England was the main cause of the panic.

Nonetheless,  the  public  turned  its  anger  on  Van
Buren,  who  took  office  just  before  the  panic  struck.
Ignoring  the  pleas  of  influential  bankers,  the  new
president  refused  to  revoke  the  Specie  Circular  or
take actions to stimulate the economy. Holding to his
philosophy of limited government, Van Buren advised
Congress  that  “the  less  government  interferes  with
private  pursuits  the  better  for  the  general  prosper-
ity.” As the depression deepened in 1839, this laissez-
faire  outlook  commanded  less  and  less  political
support.  Worse,  Van  Buren’s  major  piece  of  fiscal
legislation,  the  Independent  Treasury  Act  of  1840,
delayed  recovery  by  pulling  federal  specie  out  of
Jackson’s  pet  banks  (where  it  had  backed  loans)  and
placing it in government vaults, where it had little eco-
nomic impact.

The  Log  Cabin  Campaign  The  Whigs  exploited
Van  Buren’s  weakness.  In  1840,  they  organized  their

first  national  convention  and  nominated  William
Henry Harrison of Ohio for president and John Tyler
of  Virginia  for  vice  president.  A  military  hero  of  the
Battle  of  Tippecanoe  and  the  War  of  1812,  Harrison
was  well  advanced  in  age  (sixty-eight)  and  had  little
political  experience.  However,  the  Whig  leaders  in
Congress,  Henry  Clay  and  Daniel  Webster,  wanted  a
president who would rubber-stamp their program for
protective  tariffs  and  a  national  bank.  An  unpreten-
tious,  amiable  man,  Harrison  told  voters  that  Whig
policies were “the only means, under Heaven, by which
a poor industrious man may become a rich man with-
out bowing to colossal wealth.”

The  depression  stacked  the  political  cards  against
Van Buren, but the election turned as much on style as
on  substance.  It  became  the  great  “log  cabin  cam-
paign” — the first time two well-organized parties com-
peted  for  votes  through  a  new  style  of  campaigning.
Whig  songfests,  parades,  and  well-orchestrated  mass
meetings drew new voters into politics. Whig speakers
assailed “Martin Van Ruin” as a manipulative politician
with aristocratic tastes — a devotee of fancy wines, ele-
gant clothes, and polite refinement, as indeed he was.
Less truthfully, they portrayed Harrison as a self-made
man who lived contentedly in a log cabin and quaffed
hard  cider,  a  drink  of  the  common  people.  In  fact,
Harrison’s  father  was  a  wealthy  Virginia  planter  who

The Whigs Boost Harrison and
Tyler for the White House

In their quest for victory in 1840, Whig
political strategists advanced a wide-ranging
(and misleading) set of policies. This poster
celebrates William Henry Harrison and John
Tyler as candidates who would secure protect-
ive tariffs for American manufacturers — a
policy that appealed to northern voters but
one that Tyler opposed. It also promises to
cut the size of the U.S. Army, which General
Harrison did not favor. However, denouncing
a large “Standing Army” would win votes in
Virginia, where it recalled the fears of Radical
Whig Patriots of 1776 and remained central
to the states’ rights ideology espoused by
Senator Tyler and other “Old Republicans.”
Grouseland Foundation, Inc./Photo courtesy of
“Fords the Art of Photography,” Vincennes, IN.

