CHAPTER 10

  A Democratic Revolution, 1800–1844

339

President John Tyler (1790–1862)

Both as an “accidental” president and as a man, John
Tyler left his mark on the world. His initiative to annex
Texas made the election of 1844 into a pivotal contest
and led to the war with Mexico in 1846. Tyler’s ﬁrst wife,
Letitia, give birth to eight children before dying in the
White House in 1842. Two years later, he married twenty-
four-year-old Julia Gardiner, who bore him seven more
children. White House Historical Association (White House
 Collection).

had  signed  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  and
Harrison himself lived in a series of elegant mansions.
The  Whigs  boosted  their  electoral  hopes  by  wel-
coming  women  to  campaign  festivities — a  “first”  for
American  politics.  Many  Jacksonian  Democrats  had
long embraced an ideology of aggressive manhood, lik-
ening  politically  minded  females  to  “public”  women,
prostitutes who plied their trade in theaters and other
public  places.  Whigs  took  a  more  restrained  view  of
masculinity and recognized that Christian women had
already entered American public life through the tem-
perance movement and other benevolent activities. In
October 1840, Daniel Webster celebrated moral reform
to  an  audience  of  twelve  hundred  women  and  urged
them  to  back  Whig candidates.  “This  way  of  making
politicians of their women is something new under the
sun,” exclaimed one Democrat, worried that it would
bring more Whig men to the polls. And it did: more
than 80 percent of the eligible male voters cast ballots
in  1840,  up  from  fewer  than  60  percent  in  1832  and
1836 (see Figure 10.1). Heeding the Whigs’ campaign
slogan  “Tippecanoe  and  Tyler  Too,”  they  voted
Harrison into the White House with 53 percent of the
popular vote and gave the party a majority in Congress.

Tyler Subverts the Whig Agenda  Led by Clay and
Webster,  the  Whigs  in  Congress  prepared  to  reverse
the  Jacksonian  revolution.  Their  hopes  were  short-
lived;  barely  a  month  after  his  inauguration  in  1841,
Harrison died of pneumonia, and the nation got “Tyler
Too.”  But  in  what  capacity:  as  acting  president  or  as
president?  The  Constitution  was  vague  on  the  issue.
Ignoring his Whig associates in Congress, who wanted
a weak chief executive, Tyler took
the presidential oath of office and
declared  his  intention  to  govern
as  he  pleased.  As  it  turned  out,
that would not be like a Whig.

Tyler had served in the House
and  the  Senate  as  a  Jeffersonian
Democrat,  firmly  committed  to
slavery and states’ rights. He had joined the Whigs only
to protest Jackson’s stance against nullification. On eco-
nomic  issues,  Tyler  shared  Jackson’s  hostility  to  the
Second Bank and the American System. He therefore
vetoed  Whig  bills  that  would  have  raised  tariffs  and
created a new national bank. Outraged by this betrayal,
most of Tyler’s cabinet resigned in 1842, and the Whigs
expelled Tyler from their party. “His Accidency,” as he

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
How did Whigs and
Demo crats view women
in politics, and why did
they hold those views?

