340

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

was called by his critics, was now a president without a
party.

The split between Tyler and the Whigs allowed the
Democrats to regroup. The party vigorously recruited
subsistence farmers in the North, smallholding plant-
ers in the South, and former members of the Working
Men’s Parties in the cities. It also won support among
Irish and German Catholic immigrants — whose num-
bers had increased during the 1830s — by backing their
demands for religious and cultural liberty, such as the
freedom to drink beer and whiskey. A pattern of eth-
nocultural politics, as historians refer to the practice of
voting along ethnic and religious lines, now became a
prominent  feature  of  American  life.  Thanks  to  these
urban and rural recruits, the Democrats remained the
majority party in most parts of the nation. Their pro-
gram of equal rights, states’ rights, and cultural liberty
was attractive to more white Americans than the Whig
platform of economic nationalism, moral reform, tem-
perance laws, and individual mobility.

SUMMARY
In this chapter, we examined the causes and the conse-
quences  of  the  democratic  political  revolution.  We
saw that the expansion of the franchise weakened the
political  system  run  by  notables  of  high  status  and

encouraged  the  transfer  of  power  to  professional
politicians — men  like  Martin  Van  Buren,  who  were
mostly of middle-class origin.

We  also  witnessed  a  revolution  in  government
policy,  as  Andrew  Jackson  and  his  Democratic  Party
dismantled  the  mercantilist  economic  system  of
government-supported  economic  development.  On
the  national  level,  Jackson  destroyed  Henry  Clay’s
American System; on the state level, Democrats wrote
new  constitutions  that  ended  the  Commonwealth
System of government charters and subsidies to private
businesses.  Jackson’s  treatment  of  Native  Americans
was  equally  revolutionary;  the  Removal  Act  of  1830
forcefully resettled eastern Indian peoples west of the
Mississippi  River,  opening  their  ancestral  lands  to
white settlement.

Finally,  we  watched  the  emergence  of  the  Second
Party  System.  Following  the  split  in  the  Republican
Party during the election of 1824, two new parties — the
Democrats and the Whigs — developed on the national
level and eventually absorbed the members of the Anti-
Masonic  and  Working  Men’s  parties.  The  new  party
system  established  universal  suffrage  for  white  men
and  a  mode  of  representative  government  that  was
responsive to ordinary citizens. In their scope and sig-
nificance, these political innovations matched the eco-
nomic advances of both the Industrial Revolution and
the Market Revolution.

