CHAPTER 10

  CHAPTER REVIEW

341

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

franchise (p. 316)
notables (p. 316)
political machine (p. 317)
spoils system (p. 318)
caucus (p. 318)
American System (p. 319)
internal improvements (p. 319)
corrupt bargain (p. 319)
“consolidated government”

(p. 320)

Tariff of Abominations (p. 320)
nullification (p. 324)

states’ rights (p. 324)
Second Bank of the United States

(p. 325)

Indian Removal Act of 1830

(p. 327)

Trail of Tears (p. 331)
classical liberalism, or laissez-

faire (p. 332)
Whigs (p. 332)
Panic of 1837 (p. 334)
Specie Circular (p. 338)
ethnocultural politics (p. 340)

Key People

Martin Van Buren (p. 317)
John Quincy Adams (p. 318)
Henry Clay (p. 319)
Andrew Jackson (p. 319)
John C. Calhoun (p. 324)
Daniel Webster (p. 324)
Nicholas Biddle (p. 326)
Roger B. Taney (p. 331)
John Tyler (p. 339)

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  How  did  Andrew  Jackson  and  the  Democratic
Party  fundamentally  change  public  policy?  Illus-
trate your argument with specific examples.

2.  What  were  the  various  constitutional  arguments
underlying  the  debates  over  internal  improve-
ments, the tariff, and nullification?

3.  How  and  why  did  the  policies  of  the  federal  and
state  governments
toward  Native  Americans
change  between  the  1790s  (Chapter  7)  and  the

1850s,  and  what  were  the  reactions  of  Indian
peoples to those policies?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events listed under “Politics and Power” on the the-
matic timeline on page 283. As the timeline indi-
cates, the Working Men’s and Anti-Masonic parties
rose and declined between 1827 and 1834, and then
the Whig Party emerged. How do you explain the
timing of these events?

