342

PART 4

  CHAPTER REVIEW

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  The  chapter
argues that a democratic revolution swept America
in the decades after 1820 and uprooted the old sys-
tem of politics. After reviewing the discussions of
politics in Chapters 6 and 7, explain how party sys-
tems  and  political  alignments  changed  over  time
and then assess the strength of this argument.

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  Look again at the political
cartoons  on  the  tariff  (p.  320)  and  the  vice-
presidency  (p.  324).  What  point  of  view  does  the
cartoonist  support,  and  how  effective  are  the  car-
toons in championing that view? How are today’s
negative political advertisements on television sim-
ilar or different?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Robert J. Conley, Mountain Windsongs: A Novel of the
Trail of Tears (1992). Captures the human impact of
Jackson’s removal policy.

Richard Hofstadter, The Idea of a Party System (1969).
Lucidly explains the triumph of party politics.

Robert V. Remini, The Life of Andrew Jackson (1988).
Highlights Jackson’s triumphs and shortcomings.

Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America (1835).
A classic that is still worth dipping into; also available
at xroads.virginia.edu/~hyper/detoc/home.html.

Thomas N. Ingersoll, To Intermix with Our White
Brothers (2005). Argues that fear of racial intermixture
shaped popular thought and government policy
toward Indians.

Sean Wilentz, Chants Democratic (1986). Covers the
ideology of working men.

