11

C H A P T E R

INDIVIDUALISM:
THE ETHIC OF THE
MIDDLE CLASS

Ralph Waldo Emerson and

Transcendentalism

Emerson’s Literary Influence

RURAL COMMUNALISM
AND URBAN POPULAR
CULTURE

The Utopian Impulse

Joseph Smith and the Mormon

Experience

Urban Popular Culture

ABOLITIONISM

Black Social Thought: Uplift,

Race Equality, and Rebellion

Evangelical Abolitionism

Opposition and Internal Conflict

THE WOMEN’S RIGHTS
MOVEMENT

Origins of the Women’s

Movement

From Black Rights to Women’s

Rights

344

Religion and Reform
1800–1860

The spirit of reform is in every place,”

declared  the  children  of  legal  re-
former  David  Dudley  Field  in  their

handwritten monthly Gazette in 1842:

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
To  what  extent  did  individualism,
new  religious  sects,  abolitionism,
and  women’s  rights  (as  the  move-
ment  was  called  in  the  nineteenth
century)  change  American  culture
between 1820 and 1860?

The labourer with a family says “reform
the  common  schools,”  the  merchant
and  the  planter  say,  “reform  the  tar-
iff,” the lawyer “reform the laws,” the politician “reform the government,” the
abolitionist “reform the slave laws,” the moralist “reform intemperance,” . . . the
ladies  wish  their  legal  privileges  extended,  and  in  short,  the  whole  country  is
wanting reform.

Like many Americans, the Field children sensed that the political whirlwind of the
1830s had transformed the way people thought about themselves and about society.
Suddenly, thousands of men and women took inspiration from the economic progress
and  democratic  spirit  of  the  age.  Drawing  on  the  religious  optimism  of  the  Second
Great Awakening, they felt that they could improve their personal lives and society as
a  whole.  Some  activists  dedicated  themselves  to  the  cause  of  reform.  William  Lloyd
Garrison began as an antislavery advocate and foe of Indian removal and then went on
to campaign for women’s rights, paciﬁsm, and the abolition of prisons. Susan B. Anthony
embraced  antislavery,  temperance,  and  female  suffrage.  Such  obsessively  reform-
minded  individuals,  warned  Unitarian  minister  Henry  W.  Bellows,  were  pursuing  “an
object, which in its very nature is unattainable — the perpetual improvement of [people’s]
outward condition.” In Bellows’s view, human progress depended on inner character,
the “regeneration of man” through Christian precepts.

Such debates reveal the multifaceted character of the reform impulse. Like Bellows,
the ﬁrst wave of American reformers, the benevolent religious improvers of the 1820s,
hoped  to  promote  morality  and  enforce  social  discipline.  They  championed  regular
church  attendance,  temperance,  and  a  strict  moral  code.  Their  zeal  offended  many
upright citizens: “A peaceable man can hardly venture to eat or drink, . . . to correct his
child  or  kiss  his  wife,  without  obtaining  the  permission . . . of  some  moral  or  other
reform society,” said one.

A second wave of reformers — Garrison, Anthony, and other activists of the 1830s
and  1840s — undertook  to  liberate  people  from  archaic  customs  and  traditional  life-
styles. Mostly middle-class northerners and midwesterners, these activists promoted a
bewildering assortment of radical ideals: extreme individualism, common ownership of
property,  the  immediate  emancipation  of  slaves,  and  sexual  equality.  Although  their
numbers  were  small,  second-wave  reformers  challenged  deeply  rooted  cultural  prac-
tices and elicited horriﬁed opposition among the majority of Americans. As one fearful
southerner saw it, radical reformers favored a chaotic world with “No-Marriage, No-
Religion, No-Private Property, No-Law and No-Government.”

