346

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Individualism: The Ethic
of the Middle Class
Those  fears  were  not  exaggerated.  Rapid  economic
growth and geographical expansion had weakened tra-
ditional  institutions,  forcing  individuals  to  fend  for
themselves. In 1835, Alexis de Tocqueville coined the
word individualism to describe the result. Native-born
white  Americans  were  “no  longer  attached  to  each
other by any tie of caste, class, association, or family,”
the French aristocrat lamented, and so lived in social
isolation.  As  Tocqueville  mourned  the  loss  of  social
ties, the New England essayist and philosopher Ralph
Waldo Emerson (1803–1882) celebrated the liberation
of  the  individual.  Emerson’s  vision  influenced  thou-
sands  of  ordinary  Americans  and  a  generation  of
important artists, who, in the American Renaissance, a
mid-nineteenth-century  flourishing  of  literature  and
philosophy,  wrote  a  remarkable  number  of  first-class
novels, poems, and essays.

Ralph Waldo Emerson
and Transcendentalism
Emerson was the leading voice of  transcendentalism,
an  intellectual  movement  rooted  in  the  religious  soil
of  New  England.  Its  first  advocates  were  Unitarian
ministers from well-to-do New England families who
questioned  the  constraints  of  their  Puritan  heritage
(Chapter 8). For inspiration, they turned to European
romanticism,  a  new  conception  of  self  and  society.
Romantic  thinkers,  such  as  German  philosopher
Immanuel  Kant  and  English  poet  Samuel  Taylor
Coleridge, rejected the ordered, rational world of the
eighteenth-century  Enlightenment.  They  embraced
human  passion  and  sought  deeper  insight  into  the
mysteries of existence. By tapping their intuitive pow-
ers, the young Unitarians believed, people could come
to know the infinite and the eternal.

As a Unitarian, Emerson stood outside the main-
stream of American Protestantism. Unlike most Chris-
t ians, Unitarians believed that God was a single being,
not a trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. In 1832,
Emerson  took  a  more  radical  step  by  resigning  his
Boston pulpit and rejecting all organized religion. He
moved to Concord, Massachusetts, and wrote influen-
tial essays probing what he called “the infinitude of the
private man,” the radically free person.

The  young  philosopher  argued  that  people  were
trapped  by  inherited  customs  and  institutions.  They

The Founder of Transcendentalism

As this painting of Ralph Waldo Emerson by an unknown
artist indicates, the young philosopher was an attractive
man, his face brimming with conﬁdence and optimism.
With his radiant personality and incisive intellect, Emerson
deeply inﬂuenced dozens of inﬂuential writers, artists,
and scholars and enjoyed great success as a lecturer to
the emerging middle class. © The Metropolitan Museum of
Art. Image source: Art Resource, NY.

wore the ideas of earlier times — New England Cal vin-
ism,  for  example — as  a  kind  of  “faded  masquerade,”
and they needed to shed those values. “What is a man
born for but to be a Reformer, a Remaker of what man
has  made?”  Emerson  asked.  In  his  view,  individuals
could  be  remade  only  by  discovering  their  “original
relation  with  Nature”  and  entering  into  a  mystical
union with the “currents of Universal Being.” The ideal
setting  for  this  transcendent  discovery  was  under  an
open  sky,  in  solitary  communion  with  nature.  The
revivalist Charles Grandison Finney described his reli-
gious conversion in Emersonian terms: an individual
in  the  woods,  alone,  joining  with  God  in  a  mystical
union.

The  transcendentalist  message  of  individual  self-
realization  reached  hundreds  of  thousands  of  people
through  Emerson’s  writings  and  lectures.  Public  lec-
tures  had  become  a  spectacularly  successful  way  of

