spreading information and fostering discussion among
the  middle  classes.  Beginning  in  1826,  the  lyceum
movement — modeled  on  the  public  forum  of  the
ancient  Greek  philosopher  Aristotle — arranged  lec-
ture tours by hundreds of poets, preachers, scientists,
and reformers. The lyceum became an important cul-
tural institution in the North and Midwest, but not in
the South, where the middle class was smaller and pop-
ular education had a lower priority. In 1839, nearly 150
lyceums in Massachusetts invited lecturers to address
more than 33,000 subscribers. Emerson was the most
popular speaker, eventually delivering fifteen hundred
lectures in more than three hundred towns in twenty
states.

Emerson  celebrated  those  who  rejected  tradition
and  practiced  self-discipline  and  civic  responsibility.
His individualistic ethos spoke directly to the experi-
ences  of  many  middle-class  Americans,  who  had  left
family  farms  to  make  their  way  in  the  urban  world.
His pantheistic view of nature — that it was saturated
with the presence of God — encouraged Unitarians in
Boston to create the Mount Auburn Cemetery, a beau-
tiful planned landscape of trees and bushes and burial
markers  for  the  dead  of  all  faiths;  soon  there  were
similar  rural  cemeteries  in  many  American  cities.
Emerson’s  optimism  also  inspired  many  religious
preachers  of  the  Second  Great  Awakening,  such  as
Finney, who told believers to transcend old doctrines
and  constraints.  “God  has  made  man  a  moral  free
agent,” Finney declared.

Emerson worried that the new market society — the
focus on work, profits, and consumption — was debas-
ing  Americans’  spiritual  lives.  “Things  are  in  the
saddle,”  he  wrote,  “and  ride  mankind.”  Seeking  to
revive intellectual life, transcendentalists created com-
munal  experiments.  The  most  important  was  Brook
Farm,  just  outside  Boston,  where  Emerson,  Henry
David Thoreau, and Margaret Fuller were residents or
frequent visitors. Members recalled that they “inspired
the  young  with  a  passion  for  study,  and  the  middle-
aged  with  deference  and  admiration.”  Whatever  its
intellectual  excitement  and  spiritual  rewards,  Brook
Farm was an economic failure. The residents planned
to produce their own food and exchange their surplus
milk, vegetables, and hay for manufactures. However,
most  members  were  ministers,  teachers,  writers,  and
students who had few farming skills; only the cash of
affluent  residents  kept  the  enterprise  afloat  for  five
years.  After  a  devastating  fire  in  1846,  the  organizers
disbanded the community and sold the farm.

With the failure of Brook Farm, the Emersonians
abandoned their quest for new social institutions. They

CHAPTER 11

  Religion and Reform, 1800–1860

347

accepted  the  brute  reality  of  the
emergent commercial and indus-
trial order and tried to reform it,
especially  through  the  education
of workers and the movement to
abolish slavery.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
What were the main
principles of transcenden-
talism, and how did they
differ from the beliefs of
most Protestant Christians?

Emerson’s Literary
Influence
Even as Emerson urged his fellow citizens to break free
from tradition and expand their spiritual awareness, he
issued a declaration of literary independence. In “The
American Scholar” (1837), Emerson urged American
authors to free themselves from the “courtly muse” of
Old Europe and find inspiration in the experiences of
ordinary Americans: “the ballad in the street; the news
of the boat; the glance of the eye; the form and gait of
the body.”

Thoreau,  Fuller,  and  Whitman  One  young  New
England  intellectual,  Henry  David  Thoreau  (1817–
1862),  heeded  Emerson’s  call  and  sought  inspiration
from  the  natural  world.  In  1845,  depressed  by  his
beloved  brother’s  death,  Thoreau  built  a  cabin  near
Walden  Pond  in  Concord,  Massachusetts,  and  lived
alone there for two years. In 1854, he published Walden,
or Life in the Woods, an account of his search for mean-
ing beyond the artificiality of civilized society:

I  went  to  the  woods  because  I  wished  to  live
deliberately,  to  front  only  the  essential  facts  of  life,
and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and
not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived.

Walden’s  most  famous  metaphor  provides  an
enduring justification for independent thinking: “If a
man does not keep pace with his companions, perhaps
it is because he hears a different drummer.” Beginning
from  this  premise,  Thoreau  advocated  a  thorough-
going  individuality,  urging  readers  to  avoid  unthink-
ing conformity to social norms and peacefully to resist
unjust laws.

As  Thoreau  was  seeking  self-realization  for  men,
Margaret Fuller (1810–1850) was exploring the possi-
bilities  of  freedom  for  women.  Born  into  a  wealthy
Boston family, Fuller mastered six languages and read
broadly  in  classic  literature.  Embracing  Emerson’s
ideas,  she  started  a  transcendental  “conversation,”  or
discussion group, for educated Boston women in 1839.
While  editing  The  Dial,  the  leading  transcendentalist
journal,  Fuller  published  Woman  in  the  Nineteenth
Century (1844).

