348

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

To see a longer excerpt of Woman in the
Nineteenth Century, along with other primary
sources from this period, see Sources for America’s
History.

The poet Walt Whitman (1819–1892) also responded
to Emerson’s call. He had been “simmering, simmering,”
he recalled, and then Emerson “brought me to a boil.”
Whitman worked as a printer, a teacher, a journalist, an
editor of the Brooklyn Eagle, and an influential publicist
for  the  Democratic  Party.  However,  poetry  was  the
“direction of his dreams.” In Leaves of Grass, a collection
of  wild,  exuberant  poems  first  published  in  1855  and
constantly revised and expanded, Whitman recorded in
verse his efforts to transcend various “invisible bound-
aries”: between solitude and community, between prose
and poetry, even between the living and the dead. At the
center of Leaves of Grass is the individual — “I, Walt.”
He begins alone: “I celebrate myself, and sing myself.”
Because he has an Emersonian “original relation” with
nature, Whitman claims perfect communion with oth-
ers: “For every atom belonging to me as good belongs
to you.” For Emerson, Thoreau, and Fuller, the individ-
ual  had  a  divine  spark;  for  Whitman,  the  collective
democracy assumed a sacred character.

The  transcendentalists  were  optimistic  but  not
naive.  Whitman  wrote  about  human  suffering  with
passion, and Emerson laced his accounts of transcen-
dence with twinges of anxiety. “I am glad,” he once said,
“to  the  brink  of  fear.”  Thoreau  was  gloomy  about
everyday life: “The mass of men lead lives of quiet des-
peration.”  Nonetheless,  dark  murmurings  remain
muted in their work, overshadowed by assertions that
nothing was impossible for the individual who could
break free from tradition.

Margaret Fuller, 1848

At the age of thirty-eight, the American transcendentalist
author Margaret Fuller moved to Italy, where she reported on
the Revolution of 1848 for the New York Tribune. There she
fell in love with Thomas Hicks (1823–1890), a much younger
American artist. Hicks rebuffed Fuller’s romantic advances but
painted this ﬂattering portrait, softening her features and
giving her a pensive look. Fuller took as a lover a petty noble
and republican revolutionary, Giovanni Angelo, Marchese
d’Ossoli, and gave birth to a son in September 1848. Two
years later, the entire family died in a shipwreck while en
route to the United States. Constance Fuller Threinen.

Fuller embraced the transcendental principle that
all people could develop a life-affirming mystical rela-
tionship  with  God.  Every  woman  therefore  deserved
psychological and social independence: the ability “to
grow, as an intellect to discern, as a soul to live freely
and  unimpeded.”  She  wrote:  “We  would  have  every
arbitrary  barrier  thrown  down  [and]  every  path  laid
open to Woman as freely as to Man.” Fuller became the
literary  critic  of  the  New  York
Tribune  and  traveled  to  Italy  to
report on the Revolution of 1848,
only to drown in a shipwreck en
route home  to  the  United  States.
Fuller’s life and writings inspired a
rising generation of women writ-
ers and reformers.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did authors of the
American Renaissance
incorporate transcen-
dentalist ideas into their
work?

Darker Visions  Emerson’s  writings  also  influenced
two great novelists, Nathaniel Hawthorne and Herman
Melville, who had more pessimistic worldviews. Both
sounded  powerful  warnings  that  unfettered  egoism
could  destroy  individuals  and  those  around  them.
Hawthorne brilliantly explored the theme of excessive
individualism  in  his  novel  The  Scarlet  Letter  (1850).
The  two  main  characters,  Hester  Prynne  and  Arthur
Dimmesdale,  blatantly  challenge  their  seventeenth-
century New England community by committing adul-
tery  and  producing  a  child.  Their  decision  to  ignore
social restraints results not in liberation but in degra-
dation: a profound sense of guilt and condemnation by
the community.

Herman Melville explored the limits of individual-
ism in even more extreme and tragic terms and emerged

