CHAPTER 11

  Religion and Reform, 1800–1860

349

as  a  scathing  critic  of  transcendentalism.  His  most
powerful statement was Moby Dick (1851), the story of
Cap tain Ahab’s obsessive hunt for a mysterious white
whale that ends in death for Ahab and all but one mem-
ber of his crew. Here, the quest for spiritual meaning in
nature brings death, not transcendence, because Ahab,
the  liberated  individual,  lacks  inner  discipline  and
self-restraint.

Moby Dick was a commercial failure. The middle-
class  audience  that  devoured  sentimental  American
fiction refused to follow Melville into the dark, danger-
ous realm of individualism gone mad. What middle-
class  readers  emphatically  preferred  were  the  more
modest examples of individualism offered by Emerson
and Finney: personal improvement and religious piety
through spiritual awareness and self-discipline.

Rural Communalism and
Urban Popular Culture
Between 1820 and 1860, thousands of Americans grew
dissatisfied  with  life  in  America’s  emerging  market
society and retreated into rural areas of the Northeast
and Midwest (Map 11.1). There they sought to create
ideal communities, or utopias, that would allow people
to live differently and realize their spiritual potential.
Simultaneously, tens of thousands of rural Ameri-
cans and European immigrants poured into the larger

cities of the United States. There, they created a popu-
lar  culture  that  challenged  some  sexual  norms,  rein-
forced traditional racist feelings, and encouraged new
styles of dress and behavior.

The Utopian Impulse
Many  rural  communalists  were  farmers  and  artisans
seeking refuge from the economic depression of 1837–
1843.  Others  were  religious  idealists.  Whatever  their
origins, these rural utopias were symbols of social pro-
test and experimentation. By advocating the common
ownership of property (socialism) and unconventional
forms  of  marriage  and  family  life,  the  communalists
challenged  traditional  property  rights  and  gender
roles.

Mother Ann and the Shakers  The United Society
of  Believers  in  Christ’s  Second  Appearing,  known
as  the  Shakers  because  of  the  ecstatic  dances  that
were  part  of  their  worship,  was  the  first  successful
American  communal  movement.  In  1770,  Ann  Lee
Stanley (Mother Ann), a young cook in Manchester,
England,  had  a  vision  that  she  was  an  incarnation
of  Christ.  Four  years  later,  she  led  a  few  followers
to  America  and  established  a  church  near  Albany,
New York.

After  Mother  Ann’s  death  in  1784,  the  Shakers
honored  her  as  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ,  with-
drew from the profane world, and formed disciplined

MAP 11.1
Major Communal Experiments Before 1860

Some experimental communities settled
along the frontier, but the vast majority
chose rural areas in settled regions of the
North and Mid west. Because they opposed
slavery, communalists usually avoided the
South. Most secular experiments failed
within a few decades, as the founders lost
their reformist enthusiasm or died off; tightly
knit religious communities, such as the Shakers
and the Mormons, were longer-lived.

0

0

150

300 miles

150

300 kilometers

C A NA DA

W

N

E

S

Oneida
Community
1848–1879

VT.

N.H.

NEW
YORK

MAINE

Brook Farm
1841–1846

MASS.

MINNESOTA

WISCONSIN

MICHIGAN

IOWA
Amana
1843–1932

NEBR.
TERR.

KANSAS
TERR.

UNORG.
TERR.

Icaria
1848–1849

TEXAS

OHIO

PA.

MD.

ILLINOIS

INDIANA

Nauvoo

New Harmony
1824–1827

KENTUCKY

MISSOURI

ARKANSAS

TENNESSEE

Nashoba
1825–1830

VIRGINIA

NORTH
CAROLINA

SOUTH
CAROLINA

MISS.

ALABAMA

GEORGIA

R.I.

CONN.

N.J.

DEL.
ATLANTIC
OCEAN

Experimental
Communities

Fourierists
Owenites
Shakers
Others

(after Bestor and Meinig)

