350

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Shakers at Prayer

Most Americans viewed the Shakers with a mixture of fascination and suspicion. They feared the sect’s
radical aspects, such as a commitment to celibacy and communal property, and considered the Shakers’
dancing more an invitation to debauchery than a form of prayer. Those apprehensions surfaced in this
engraving, The Shakers of New Lebanon (New York), which expresses both the powerful intensity and
the menacing character of this Shaker spiritual ritual. The work of the journalist-engraver Joseph Becker,
the picture appeared in Frank Leslie’s Illustrated Newspaper in 1873. © Bettmann.

religious  communities.  Members  embraced  the  com-
mon ownership of property; accepted strict oversight
by church leaders; and pledged to abstain from alcohol,
tobacco, politics, and war. Shakers also repudiated sex-
ual pleasure and marriage. Their commitment to celi-
bacy  followed  Mother  Ann’s  testimony  against  “the
lustful gratifications of the flesh as the source and foun-
dation  of  human  corruption.”  The  Shakers’  theology
was  as  radical  as  their  social  thought. They  held  that
God was “a dual person, male and
female.”  This  doctrine  prompted
Shakers to repudiate male leader-
ship and to place community gov-
ernance  in  the  hands  of  both
women  and  men — the  Eldresses
and the Elders.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors led to the
proliferation of rural
utopian communities
in nineteenth-century
America?

Shakers  founded  twenty  communities,  mostly  in
New England, New York, and Ohio. Their agriculture
and crafts, especially furniture making, acquired a rep-
utation for quality that made most Shaker communi-
ties self-sustaining and even comfortable. Because the
Shakers  disdained  sexual  intercourse,  they  relied  on
conversions  and  the  adoption of  thousands  of  young
orphans to increase their numbers. During the 1830s,
three  thousand  adults,  mostly  women,  joined  the
Shakers,  attracted  by  their  communal  intimacy  and
sexual  equality.  To  Rebecca  Cox  Jackson,  an  African
American  seamstress  from  Philadelphia,  the  Shakers
seemed to be “loving to live forever.” However, with the
proliferation of public and private orphanages during
the  1840s  and  1850s,  Shaker  communities  began  to
decline and, by 1900, had virtually disappeared. They

