CHAPTER 11

  Religion and Reform, 1800–1860

351

left as a material legacy a plain but elegant style of wood
furniture.

Associated  households,”  men  would  share  women’s
domestic labor and thereby increase sexual equality.

Albert  Brisbane  and  Fourierism  As  the  Shakers’
growth  slowed  during  the  1840s,  the  American
Fourierist  movement  mushroomed.  Charles  Fourier
(1777–1837)  was  a  French  reformer  who  devised  an
eight-stage theory of social evolution that predicted the
imminent  decline  of  individual  property  rights  and
capitalist values. Fourier’s leading disciple in America
was  Albert  Brisbane.  Just  as  republicanism  had  freed
Americans  from  slavish  monarchical  government,
Brisbane argued, so Fourierist socialism would liberate
workers from capitalist employers and the “menial and
slavish  system  of  Hired  Labor  or  Labor  for  Wages.”
Members would work for the community, in coopera-
tive groups called phalanxes; they would own its prop-
erty in common, including stores and a bank, a school,
and a library.

Fourier and Brisbane saw the phalanx as a humane
system that would liberate women as well as men. “In
society as it is now constituted,” Brisbane wrote, indi-
vidual  freedom  was  possible  only  for  men,  while
“woman is subjected to unremitting and slavish domes-
tic  duties.”  In  the  “new  Social  Order . . . based  upon

Brisbane skillfully promoted Fourier’s ideas in his
influential  book  The  Social  Destiny  of  Man  (1840),  a
regular column in Horace Greeley’s New York Tribune,
and  hundreds  of  lectures.  Fourierist  ideas  found  a
receptive audience among educated farmers and crafts-
men, who yearned for economic stability and commu-
nal solidarity following the Panic of 1837. During the
1840s, Fourierists started nearly one hundred coopera-
tive communities, mostly in western New York and the
Midwest. Most communities quickly collapsed as mem-
bers fought over work responsibilities and social poli-
cies.  Fourierism’s  rapid  decline  revealed  the  difficulty
of maintaining a utopian community in the absence of
a charismatic leader or a compelling religious vision.

John Humphrey Noyes and Oneida
John Humphrey
Noyes  (1811–1886)  was  both  charismatic  and  reli-
gious. He ascribed the Fourierists’ failure to their secu-
lar  outlook  and  embraced  the  pious  Shakers  as  the
true  “pioneers  of  modern  Socialism.”  The  Shakers’
marriageless  society  also  inspired  Noyes  to  create  a
community that defined sexuality and gender roles in
radically new ways.

Attacking the Women’s Rights
Movement

Amelia Jenks Bloomer (1818–1894)
wrote for her husband’s newspaper,
the County Courier of Seneca Falls,
New York. In 1848 she attended the
women’s conven tion there and began
her own biweekly newspaper, The Lily,
focusing on temperance and women’s
rights. In 1851, Bloomer enthusiastically
promoted — and serendipitously gave
her name to — the comfortable women’s
costume devised by another temperance
activist: loose trousers gathered at the
ankles topped by a short skirt. Fearing
women’s quest for equal dress and
equal rights, humorists such as John
Leech ridiculed the new female attire.
Here, bloomer-attired women smoke
away and belittle the male proprietor
as “one of the ‘inferior animals,’ ” a
thinly veiled effort by Leech to reassert
men’s “natural” claim as the dominant
sex. From Punch 1851, John Leech Archive.

