352

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Noyes  was  a  well-to-do  graduate  of  Dartmouth
College  who  joined  the  ministry  after  hearing  a  ser-
mon  by  Charles  Grandison  Finney.  Dismissed  as  the
pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  for  holding  unor-
thodox  beliefs,  Noyes  turned  to  perfectionism,  an
evangelical  Protestant  movement  of  the  1830s  that
attracted  thousands  of  New  Englanders  who  had
migrated to New York and Ohio. Perfectionists believed
that Christ had already returned to earth (the Second
Coming) and therefore people could aspire to sinless
perfection  in  their  earthly  lives.  Unlike  most  perfec-
tionists, who lived conventional personal lives, Noyes
rejected marriage, calling it a major barrier to perfec-
tion. “Exclus iveness, jealousy, quarreling have no place
at  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb,”  Noyes  wrote.
Instead of the Shakers’ celibacy, Noyes embraced “com-
plex marriage,” in which all members of the commu-
nity were married to one another. He rejected monog-
amy  partly  to  free  women  from  their  status  as  the
property of their husbands, as they were by custom and
by  common  law.  Symbolizing  the  quest  for  equality,
Noyes’s women followers cut their hair short and wore
pantaloons under calf-length skirts.

In  1839,  Noyes  set  up  a  perfectionist  community
near  his  hometown  of  Putney,  Vermont.  However,
local  outrage  over  the  practice  of  complex  marriage
forced Noyes to relocate the community in 1848 to an
isolated area near Oneida, New York, where the mem-
bers could follow his precepts. To give women the time
and  energy  to  participate  fully  in  community  affairs,
Noyes  urged  them  to  avoid  multiple  pregnancies.  He
asked  men  to  help  by  avoiding  orgasm  during  inter-
course. Less positively, he encouraged sexual relations
at a very early age and used his position of power to
manipulate the sexual lives of his followers.

By the mid-1850s, the Oneida settlement had two
hundred  residents  and  became  self-sustaining  when
the  inventor  of  a  highly  successful  steel  animal  trap
joined the community. With the profits from trap mak-
ing,  the  Oneidians  diversified  into  the  production  of
silverware.  When  Noyes  fled  to  Canada  in  1879  to
avoid prosecution for adultery, the community aban-
doned complex marriage but retained its cooperative
spirit.  The  Oneida  Community,  Ltd.,  a  jointly  owned
silverware-manufacturing  company,  remained  a  suc-
cessful  communal  venture  until  the  middle  of  the
twentieth century.

The historical significance of the Oneidians, Shak-
ers,  and  Fourierists  does  not  lie  in  their  numbers,
which were small, or in their fine crafts. Rather, it stems
from  their  radical  questioning  of  traditional  sexual
norms and of the capitalist values and class divisions of
the emerging market society. Their utopian communi-
ties stood as countercultural blueprints of a more egal-
itarian social and economic order.

Joseph Smith and the
Mormon Experience
The Mormons, members of the Church of Jesus Christ
of  Latter-day  Saints,  were  religious  utopians  with  a
conservative  social  agenda:  to  perpetuate  close-knit
communities  and  patriarchal  power.  Because  of  their
cohesiveness,  authoritarian  leadership,  and  size,  the
Mormons  provoked  more  animosity  than  the  radical
utopians did.

Joseph  Smith  Like  many  social  movements  of  the
era,  Mormonism  emerged  from  religious  ferment
among families of Puritan descent who lived along the

A Mormon Man and His Wives

The practice of polygamy split the
Mormon community and, because it
deviated from Christian religious prin-
ciples, enraged Protestant denominations.
This Mormon household, pictured in the
late 1840s, was unusually prosperous,
partly because of the labor of the hus-
band’s multiple wives. Although the
cabin provides cramped quarters for a
large polygamous family, it boasts a brick
chimney and — a luxury for any pioneer
home — a glass window. Library of Congress.

