Erie Canal and who were heirs to a religious tradition
that believed in a world of wonders, supernatural pow-
ers, and visions of the divine.

The  founder  of  the  Latter-day  Church,  Joseph
Smith Jr. (1805–1844), was born in Vermont to a poor
farming  and  shop-keeping  family  that  migrated  to
Palmyra in central New York. In 1820, Smith began to
have religious experiences similar to those described in
conversion  narratives:  “[A]  pillar  of  light  above  the
brightness  of  the  sun  at  noonday  came  down  from
above  and  rested  upon  me  and  I  was  filled  with  the
spirit  of  God.”  Smith  came  to  believe  that  God  had
singled him out to receive a special revelation of divine
truth.  In  1830,  he  published  The  Book  of  Mormon,
which  he  claimed  to  have  translated  from  ancient
hieroglyphics on gold plates shown to him by an angel
named Moroni. The Book of Mormon told the story of
an  ancient  Jewish  civilization  from  the  Middle  East
that had migrated to the Western Hemisphere and of
the visit of Jesus Christ, soon after his Resurrection, to
those descendants of Israel. Smith’s account explained
the  presence  of  native  peoples  in  the  Americas  and
integrated them into the Judeo-Christian tradition.

Smith  proceeded  to  organize  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints. Seeing himself as a prophet
in  a  sinful,  excessively  individualistic  society,  Smith
revived traditional social doctrines, including patriar-
chal  authority.  Like  many  Protestant  ministers,  he
encouraged practices that led to individual success in
the age of capitalist markets and factories: frugality, hard
work,  and  enterprise.  Smith  also  stressed  communal
discipline to safeguard the Mormon “New Jeru sa lem.”
His goal was a church-directed society that would restore
primitive Christianity and encourage moral perfection.
Constantly  harassed  by  anti-Mormons,  Smith
struggled to find a secure home for his new religion. At

MAP 11.2
The Mormon Trek, 1830–1848

Because of their unorthodox religious views and
communal solidarity, Mormons faced hostility ﬁrst
in New York and then in Missouri and Illinois. After
founder Joseph Smith Jr. was murdered, Brigham
Young led the polygamist faction of Mormons
into lands claimed by Mexico and thinly populated
by Native Americans. From Omaha, the migrants
followed the path of the Oregon Trail to Fort Bridger
and then struck off to the southwest. They settled
along the Wasatch Range in the basin of the Great
Salt Lake in present-day Utah.

CHAPTER 11

  Religion and Reform, 1800–1860

353

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
In what ways were
Mormons similar to,
and different from, other
communal movements of
the era?

one  point,  he  identified  Jackson
County  in  Missouri  as  the  site
of  the  sacred  “City  of  Zion,”  and
his followers began to settle there.
Agitation led by Protestant minis-
ters  quickly  forced  them  out:
“Mormons  were  the  common
enemies of mankind and ought to
be destroyed,” said one cleric. Smith and his growing
congregation  eventually  settled  in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  a
town they founded on the Mississippi River (Map 11.2).
By the early 1840s, Nauvoo had 30,000 residents. The
Mormons’  rigid  discipline  and  secret  rituals — along
with their prosperity, hostility toward other sects, and
bloc  voting  in  Illinois  elections — fueled  resentment
among  their  neighbors.  That  resentment  increased
when Smith refused to accept Illinois laws of which he
disapproved, asked Congress to make Nauvoo a sepa-
rate federal territory, and declared himself a candidate
for president of the United States.

Moreover,  Smith  claimed  to  have  received  a  new
revelation  justifying  polygamy,  the  practice  of  a  man
having  multiple  wives.  When  leading  Mormon  men
took several wives — “plural celestial marriage” — they
threw  the  Mormon  community  into  turmoil  and
enraged  nearby  Christians.  In  1844,  Illinois  officials
arrested Smith and charged him with treason for alleg-
edly conspiring to create a Mormon colony in Mexican
territory.  An  anti-Mormon  mob  stormed  the  jail  in
Carthage,  Illinois,  where  Smith  and  his  brother  were
being held and murdered them.

Brigham Young and Utah  Led by Brigham Young,
Smith’s  leading  disciple  and  now  the  sect’s  “prophet,
seer  and  revelator,”  about  6,500  Mormons  fled  the
United  States.  Beginning  in  1846,  they  crossed  the

C A N A D A

Winter
Quarters
(Omaha)
1846–1848

Salt Lake
City

Ft. Bridger

W
A
S
R
A
A
T
N
C
G
H
E

Fayette
1830

N

Nauvoo
1840–1846

Kirtland
1831–1838

Independence
1831–1839

W

E

S

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

PACIFIC
OCEAN

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

M E X I C O

Mormon Trail

Proposed state of Deseret

Area of significant
Mormon population
in the West, 1960

