354

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Great Plains into Mexican territory and settled in the
Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  in  present-day  Utah.  Using
cooperative  labor  and  an  irrigation  system  based  on
communal water rights, the Mormon pioneers quickly
spread agricultural communities along the base of the
Wasatch Range. Many Mormons who rejected polyg-
amy remained in the United States. Led by Smith’s son,
Joseph Smith III, they formed the Reorganized Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and settled through-
out the Midwest.

When the United States acquired Mexico’s north-
ern  territories  in  1848,  the  Salt  Lake  Mormons  peti-
tioned  Congress  to  create  a  vast  new  state,  Deseret,
stretching  from  Utah  to  the  Pacific  coast.  Instead,
Congress  set  up  the  much  smaller  Utah  Territory  in
1850 and named Brigham Young its governor. Young
and  his  associates  ruled  in  an  authoritarian  fashion,
determined to ensure the ascendancy of the Mormon
Church and its practices. By 1856, Young and the Utah
territorial legislature were openly vowing to resist fed-
eral laws. Pressed by Protestant church leaders to end
polygamy  and  considering  the  Mormons’  threat  of
nullification  “a  declaration  of  war,”  President  James
Buchanan  dispatched  a  small  army  to  Utah.  As  the
“Nauvoo Legion” resisted the army’s advance, aggres-
sive  Mormon  militia  massacred  a  party  of  120
California-bound emigrants and murdered suspicious
travelers and Mormons seeking to flee Young’s regime.
Despite  this  bloodshed,  the  “Mormon  War”  ended
quietly in June 1858. President Buchanan, a longtime
supporter  of  the  white  South,  feared  that  the  forced
abolition of polygamy would serve as a precedent for
ending  slavery  and  offered  a  pardon  to  Utah  citizens
who would acknowledge federal authority. (To enable
Utah to win admission to the Union in 1896, its citi-
zens  ratified  a  constitution  that  “forever”  banned  the
practice of polygamy. However, the state government
has never strictly enforced that ban.)

The  Salt  Lake  Mormons  had  succeeded  even  as
other social experiments had failed. Reaffirming tradi-
tional  values,  their  leaders  resolutely  used  strict  reli-
gious controls to perpetuate patriarchy and communal
discipline. However, by endorsing
private  property  and  individual
enterprise,  Mormons  became
prosperous  contributors  to  the
new market society. This blend of
economic innovation, social con-
servatism,  and  hierarchical  lead-
ership,  in  combination  with  a
strong  missionary  impulse,  cre-
ated  a  wealthy  and  expansive

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How were the cultures
of utopian communalists
and urban residents simi-
lar to and different from
the mainstream culture
described in Chapters 8
and 9?

church  that  now  claims  a  worldwide  membership  of
about 12 million people.

Urban Popular Culture
As  utopians  organized  communities  in  the  country-
side, rural migrants and foreign immigrants created a
new urban culture. In 1800, American cities were over-
grown  towns  with  rising  death  rates:  New  York  had
only 60,000 residents, Philadelphia had 41,000, and life
expectancy at birth was a mere twenty-five years. Then
urban growth accelerated as a huge in-migration out-
weighed  the  high  death  rates.  By  1840,  New  York’s
population  had  ballooned  to  312,000;  Philadelphia
and its suburbs had 150,000 residents; and three other
cities — New  Orleans,  Boston,  and  Baltimore — each
had about 100,000. By 1860, New York had become a
metropolis with more than 1 million residents: 813,000
in  Manhattan  and  another  266,000  in  the  adjacent
community of Brooklyn.

Sex in the City  These newly populous cities, partic-
ularly  New  York,  generated  a  new  urban  culture.
Thousands  of  young  men  and  women  flocked  to  the
city  searching  for  adventure  and  fortune,  but  many
found only a hard life. Young men labored for meager
wages  building  thousands  of  tenements,  warehouses,
and  workshops.  Others  worked  as  low-paid  clerks  or
operatives in hundreds of mercantile and manufactur-
ing firms. The young women had an even harder time.
Thousands toiled as live-in domestic servants, ordered
about by the mistress of the household and often sexu-
ally exploited by the master. Thousands more scraped
out a bare living as needlewomen in New York City’s
booming  ready-made  clothes  industry.  Unwilling  to
endure  domestic  service  or  subsistence  wages,  many
young girls turned to prostitution. Dr. William Sanger’s
careful survey, commissioned in 1855 by worried city
officials, found six thousand women engaged in com-
mercial sex. Three-fifths were native-born whites, and
the rest were foreign immigrants; most were between
fifteen  and  twenty  years  old.  Half  were  or  had  been
domestic  servants,  half  had  children,  and  half  were
infected with syphilis.

Commercialized sex — and sex in general — formed
one  facet  of  the  new  urban  culture.  “Sporting  men”
engaged freely in sexual conquests; otherwise respect-
able married men kept mistresses in handy apartments;
and working men frequented bawdy houses. New York
City  had  two  hundred  brothels  in  the  1820s  and  five
hundred by the 1850s. Prostitutes — so-called “public”
women — openly advertised their wares on Broadway,

