CHAPTER 11

  Religion and Reform, 1800–1860

355

Night Life in Philadelphia

This watercolor by Russian painter Pavel
Svinin (1787–1839) captures the social
diversity and allure of urban America.
A respectable gentleman relishes the
delicacies sold by a black oysterman.
Meanwhile, a young woman — probably
a prostitute but perhaps an adventurous
working girl — engages the attention of
two well-dressed young “swells” outside
the Chestnut Street Theatre. Such scenes
were new to Americans and marked the
beginning of a profound split between the
nation’s rural and urban cultures. © The
Metropolitan Museum of Art. Image source:
Art Resource, NY.

the  city’s  most  fashionable  thoroughfare,  and  wel-
comed  clients  on  the  infamous  “Third  Tier”  of  the
theaters.  Many  men  considered  illicit  sex  as  a  right.
“Man is endowed by nature with passions that must be
gratified,” declared the Sporting Whip, a working-class
magazine. Even the Reverend William Berrian, pastor
of  the  ultra-respectable  Trinity  Episcopal  Church,
remarked  from  the  pulpit  that  he  had  resorted  ten
times to “a house of ill-fame.”

Prostitution formed only the tip of the urban sexual
volcano.  Freed  from  family  oversight,  men  formed
homoerotic  friendships  and  relationships;  as  early
as 1800, the homosexual “Fop” was an acknowledged
character  in  Philadelphia.  Young  people  moved  from
partner to partner until they chanced on an ideal mate.
Middle-class  youth  strolled  along  Broadway  in  the
latest  fashions:  elaborate  bonnets  and  silk  dresses
for  young  women;  flowing  capes,  leather  boots,  and

silver-plated  walking  sticks  for  young  men.  Rivaling
the elegance on Broadway was the colorful dress on the
Bowery, the broad avenue that ran along the east side
of lower Manhattan. By day, the “Bowery Boy” worked
as an apprentice or journeyman. By night, he prowled
the streets as a “consummate dandy,” his hair cropped
at the back of his head “as close as scissors could cut,”
with long front locks “matted by a lavish application of
bear’s grease, the ends tucked under so as to form a roll
and  brushed  until  they  shone  like  glass  bottles.”  The
“B’hoy,”  as  he  was  called,  cut  a  dashing  figure  as  he
walked along with a “Bowery Gal” in a striking dress
and shawl: “a  light pink contrasting with a deep blue”
or “a bright yellow with a brighter red.”

Minstrelsy  Popular  entertainment  was  a  central
facet of the new urban culture. In New York, working-
traditional  rural  blood
men  could  partake  of

