356

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

sports — rat  and  terrier  fights  as  well  as  boxing
matches — at Sportsmen Hall, or they could seek drink
and fun in billiard and bowling saloons. Other workers
crowded  into  the  pit  of  the  Bowery  Theatre  to  see
the  “Mad  Tragedian,”  Junius  Brutus  Booth,  deliver
a  stirring  (abridged)  performance  of  Shakespeare’s
Richard III. Reform-minded couples enjoyed evenings
at  the  huge  Broadway  Tabernacle,  where  they  could
lecture,  see  the  renowned
hear  an  abolitionist
Hutchinson  Family  Singers  lead  a  roof-raising  rendi-
tion of their antislavery anthem, “Get Off the Track,”
and  sentimentally  lament  the  separation  of  a  slave
couple  in  Stephen  Foster’s  “Oh  Susanna,”  a  popular
song of the late 1840s. Families could visit the museum
of oddities (and hoaxes) created by P. T. Barnum, the
great cultural entrepreneur and founder of the Barnum
& Bailey Circus.

However,  the  most  popular  theatrical  entertain-
ments were the minstrel shows, in which white actors
in blackface  presented  comic routines  that  combined
racist caricature and social criticism. Minstrelsy began
around  1830,  when  a  few  actors  put  on  blackface
and  performed  song-and-dance  routines  (Thinking
Like a  Historian, p.  358). The  most  famous  was  John
Dartmouth  Rice,  whose  “Jim  Crow” blended  a  weird
lyrics
shuffle-dance-and-jump  with  unintelligible
delivered in “Negro dialect.” By the 1840s, there were
hundreds  of  minstrel  troupes,  including  a  group  of
black  entertainers,  Gavitt’s  Original  Ethiopian  Sere-
nad ers. The actor-singers’ rambling lyrics poked racist
fun  at  African  Americans,  portraying  them  as  lazy,
sensual, and irresponsible while simultaneously using
them to criticize white society. Minstrels ridiculed the

drunkenness of Irish immigrants, parodied the halting
English  of  German  immigrants,  denounced  women’s
demands  for  political  rights,  and  mocked  the  arro-
gance of upper-class men. Still, by caricaturing blacks,
the minstrels declared the importance of being white
and spread racist sentiments among Irish and German
immigrants.

Immigrant Masses and Nativist Reaction  By 1850,
immigrants  were  a  major  presence  throughout  the
Northeast.  Irish  men  and  women  in  New  York  City
numbered 200,000, and Germans 110,000 (Fig ure 11.1).
German-language  shop  signs  filled  entire  neighbor-
hoods,  and  German  foods  (sausages,  hamburgers,
sauerkraut) and food customs (such as drinking beer
in family biergärten) became part of the city’s culture.
The mass of impoverished Irish migrants found allies
in the American Catholic Church, which soon became
an  Irish-dominated  institution,  and  the  Democratic
Party,  which  gave  them  a  foothold  in  the  political
process.

Native-born New Yorkers took alarm as hordes of
ethnically  diverse  migrants  altered  the  city’s  culture.
They organized a nativist movement — a final aspect of
the  new  urban  world.  Beginning  in  the  mid-1830s,
nativists called for a halt to immigration and mounted
a  cultural  and  political  assault  on  foreign-born  resi-
dents  (Chapter  9).  Gangs  of  B’hoys  assaulted  Irish
youths in the streets, employers restricted Irish work-
ers to the most menial jobs, and temperance reformers
denounced  the  German  fondness  for  beer.  In  1844,
the American Republican Party, with the endorsement
of the Whigs, swept the city elections by focusing on

Immigrants
(thousands)

Irish potato famine /
“the Great Hunger”
1845–1852

U.S. Civil War
1861–1865

German revolutions
1848−1849

U.S.
economic
recession
1856−1857

1825

1830

1835

1840

1845

1850

1855

1860

1865

1870

450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0
1820

FIGURE 11.1
The Surge in Imigration, 1854–1855

In 1845, the failure of the potato crop in Ireland
prompted the wholesale migration to the United
States of peasants from the overcrowded farms of
its western counties. Population growth and limited
economic prospects likewise spurred the migration
of tens of thousands of German peasants, while the
failure of the liberal republican political revolution
of 1848 prompted hundreds of prominent German
politicians and intellectuals to follow them. An
American economic recession cut the ﬂow of immi-
grants, but the booming northern economy during
the Civil War again persuaded Europeans to set sail
for the United States.

