CHAPTER 11

  Religion and Reform, 1800–1860

357

the  culturally  emotional  issues  of  temperance,  anti-
Catholicism, and nativism.

In the city, as in the countryside, new values were
challenging old beliefs. The sexual freedom celebrated
by Noyes at Oneida had its counterpart in commercial-
ized sex and male promiscuity in New York City, where
it came  under attack from the Female Moral Reform
Society. Similarly, the disciplined rejection of tobacco
and alcohol by the Shakers and the Mormons found a
parallel  in  the  Washington  Temperance  Society  and
other  urban  reform  organizations.  American  society
was in ferment, and the outcome was far from clear.

Abolitionism
Like other reform movements, the abolitionist crusade
of  the  1830s  drew  on  the  religious  enthusiasm  of
the Second Great Awakening. Around 1800, antislav-
ery  activists  had  assailed  human  bondage  as  con-
trary to republicanism and liberty. Three decades later,
white  abolitionists  condemned  slavery  as  a  sin  and
demanded immediate, uncompensated emancipation.
Their  uncom promising  stance  led  to  fierce  political
debates, urban riots, and sectional conflict.

Rampant Racism

Minstrel shows and their music were just two facets
of the racist culture of mid-nineteenth-century
Amer ica. Exploiting the market for almanacs among
farmers and city-folk alike, the publishing ﬁrm of
Fisher and Brother produced the Black Joke Al-Ma-
Nig for 1852. Like other almanacs, it provided
astrological charts, weather predictions, and a
detailed calendar of events. To boost sales, the
almanac included “new an’ original nigga’ stories,
black jokes, puns, parodies” that would “magne-
tize bofe white an’ black.” Such racist caricatures
of black faces and language inﬂuenced white
views of African Americans well into the twentieth
century. Courtesy: The Library Company of Philadelphia.

