T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Dance and Social

Identity in Antebellum

America

Styles  of  dance  and  attitudes  toward  them  tell  us  a  great  deal  about  cultural
and social norms. When nineteenth-century Americans took to partying, their
dances — regardless of the class or ethnic identity of the dancers — focused more
on  individual  couples  and  allowed  more  room  for  improvisation  and  intimacy
than the dance forms of the previous century.

1.  William Sidney Mount, Rustic Dance After a Sleigh
Ride, 1830. In the eighteenth century, wealthy,
fashionable Americans danced the French minuet,
a ceremonious and graceful dance in which couples
executed prescribed steps while barely touching.
Ordinary white folks preferred the country dances
brought by their ancestors from Europe, which
also involved intricate steps, line formations, and
limited physical contact. Mount (1807–1868) was
self-taught, lived in rural Long Island, and depicted
scenes of everyday life. This painting, replete with
amorous pursuits, depicts a traditional contra
dance in which the lead couple advances a few
steps and then sashays to the back of the line,
as another couple takes its place.

was the most widely circulated American periodical
prior to the Civil War and an arbiter of good taste
among the aspiring middle classes. Each issue con-
tained a sheet of music for the latest dance craze.
The Lady’s Book cautiously endorsed the waltz,
a sensuous dance that required a close embrace,
but enthusiastically welcomed its cousin, the polka,
whose lively tempo and rapid spinning had a
wholesome and joyful quality. Introduced from
Bohemia, the polka dominated the ballrooms of
America’s upper and middle classes in the 1840s
and 1850s.

Private Collection/The Bridgeman Art Library.

Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts, USA/Bequest of Martha C. Karolik
for the M. and M. Karolik/Collection of American Paintings, 1815–65/The Bridge-
man Art Library.

2.  “The Polka Fashions,” from Godey’s Lady’s Book,
1845. “A magazine of elegant literature,” accord-
ing to its publisher, Louis A. Godey, the Lady’s Book

3.  George Templeton Strong, diary entry, December

23, 1845.

Well, last night I spent at Mrs. Mary Jones’s great ball.
Very splendid affair — “the Ball of the Season.” . . . Two
houses open, standing supper table, “dazzling array of
beauty and fashion.” “Polka” for the first time brought
under my inspection. It’s a kind of insane Tartar jig per-
formed to disagreeable music of an uncivilized character.

358

