4.  Description of juba dancing from Charles Dickens,
American Notes for General Circulation, 1842.
In New York’s Five Points slum in 1842, Charles
Dickens described a challenge dance featuring
William Henry Lane, or Master Juba, a young
African American who created juba dancing,
a blend of Irish jig and African dance moves.

The corpulent black fiddler, and his friend who plays the
tambourine, stamp upon the boarding of the small raised
orchestra in which they sit, and play a lively measure. Five
or six couples come upon the floor, marshalled by a lively
young negro, who is the wit of the assembly, and the
greatest dancer known. . . . Instantly the fiddler grins,
and goes at it tooth and nail; there is new energy in the
tambourine. . . . Single shuffle, double shuffle, cut and
cross-cut; snapping his fingers, rolling his eyes, turning in
his knees, presenting the backs of his legs in front, spin-
ning about on his toes and heels like nothing but the
man’s fingers on the tambourine; dancing with two left
legs, two right legs, two wooden legs, two wire legs, two
spring legs — all sorts of legs and no legs — . . . having
danced his partner off her feet, and himself too, he fin-
ishes by leaping gloriously on the bar-counter, and calling
for something to drink.

5.  Poster advertising Barlow, Wilson, Primrose, and
West’s “Mammoth Minstrels’ Colored Masquer-
ade.” Unlike slavery, minstrelsy survived the Civil
War and remained popular until the early twenti-
eth century, when it evolved into vaudeville.
Barlow, Wilson, Primrose, and West’s Mammoth

Minstrels toured the United States, Europe, and
Australia between 1877 and 1882, thrilling audi-
ences with the clog dances that had devolved out
of juba.

Sources: (3) Luther S. Harris, Around Washington Square: An Illustrated History of
Greenwich Village (Baltimore, 2003), 41; (4) Charles Dickens, American Notes and
Pictures from Italy (C. Scribner: New York, 1868), 107.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  What do sources 1 and 2 suggest about sexual manners

among rural folk and genteel urbanites?

2.  What does the polka (sources 3 and 4) reveal about
changing cultural practices among the social elite?
3.  Compare the juba and minstrelsy dances described

above (sources 4 and 5) with the polka and contra dance
forms (sources 1 and 2). How were dance forms and
popular entertainment evolving? How did those changes
relate to broader social developments?

4.  The waltz, polka, and juba dances were popular dur-
ing the Second Great Awakening, when (and long
afterward) preachers often complained that “dance is
destructive to Christian life.” Why might ministers (and
priests) take such a view? Would any form of dance be
acceptable to them?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Using the material on class, religion, and culture in Chap-
ters 9 and 11, the description of the Quarterons Ball in
Chapter 12 (p. 387), and the insights you have gathered
by a careful inspection of these sources, write an essay
showing how dance and other entertainments reﬂect
or reveal differences among American social groups.

Private Collection/Photo © Barbara Singer/The Bridgeman Art Library.

359

