360

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Black Social Thought: Uplift,
Race Equality, and Rebellion
Beginning in the 1790s, leading African Americans in
the North advocated a strategy of social uplift, encour-
aging  free  blacks  to  “elevate”  themselves  through
education,  temperance,  and  hard  work.  By  securing
“respectability,” they argued, blacks could become the
social  equals  of  whites.  To  promote  that  goal,  black
leaders — men  such  as  James  Forten,  a  Philadelphia
sailmaker; Prince Hall, a Boston barber; and ministers
Hosea Easton and Richard Allen (Chapter 8) — founded
an array of churches, schools, and self-help associations.
Capping  this  effort,  John  Russwurm  and  Samuel  D.
Cornish  of  New  York  published  the  first  African
American newspaper, Freedom’s Journal, in 1827.

CHANGE OVER TIME
How and why did Afri-
can American efforts to
achieve social equality
change between 1800
and 1840?

The black quest for respectability elicited a violent
response  in  Boston,  Pittsburgh,  and  other  northern
cities  among  whites  who  refused
to  accept  African  Americans  as
their  social  equals.  “I  am  Mr.
______’s  help,”  a  white  maid
informed  a  British  visitor.  “I  am
no  sarvant;  none  but  negers  are
sarvants.”  Motivated  by  racial
contempt,  white  mobs  terrorized
black communities. The attacks in Cincinnati were so
violent  and  destructive  that  several  hundred  African
Americans fled to Canada for safety.

David Walker’s Appeal  Responding to the attacks,
David  Walker  published  a  stirring  pamphlet,  An
Appeal . . . to the Colored Citizens of the World (1829),
protesting  black  “wretchedness  in  this  Republican
Land of Liberty!!!!!” Walker was a free black from North
Carolina  who  had  moved  to  Boston,  where  he  sold
secondhand clothes and copies of Freedom’s Journal. A
self-educated  author,  Walker  ridiculed  the  religious
pretensions of slaveholders, justified slave rebellion, and
in biblical language warned of a slave revolt if justice
were delayed. “We must and shall be free,” he told white
Americans. “And woe, woe, will be it to you if we have
to  obtain  our  freedom  by  fighting. . . . Your  destruc-
tion  is  at  hand,  and  will  be  speedily  consummated
unless  you  repent.”  Walker’s  pamphlet  quickly  went
through three printings and, carried by black merchant
seamen, reached free African Americans in the South.
In 1830, Walker and other African American activ-
ists called a national convention in Philadelphia. The
delegates refused to endorse either Walker’s radical call
for a slave revolt or the traditional program of uplift for
free  blacks.  Instead,  this  new  generation  of  activists
demanded  freedom  and  “race  equality”  for  those  of
African  descent.  They  urged  free  blacks  to  use  every
legal  means,  including  petitions  and  other  forms  of
political protest, to break “the shackles of slavery.”

Nat Turner’s Revolt  As Walker threatened violence
in Boston, Nat Turner, a slave in Southampton County,

A Call for Revolution

David Walker (1785–1830), who ran a used
clothing shop in Boston, spent his hard-earned
savings to publish An Appeal  . . . to the Colored
Citizens of the World (1829), a learned and passion-
ate attack on racial slavery. Walker depicted Christ
as an avenging “God of justice and of armies” and
raised the banner of slave rebellion. A year later, a
passerby found Walker in the doorway of his shop,
dead from unknown causes. Library of Congress.

