CHAPTER 11

  Religion and Reform, 1800–1860

361

Virginia,  staged  a  bloody  revolt — a  chronological
coincidence that had far-reaching consequences. As a
child, Turner had taught himself to read and had hoped
for emancipation, but one new master forced him into
the  fields,  and  another  separated  him  from  his  wife.
Becoming  deeply  spiritual,  Turner  had  a  religious
vision in which “the Spirit” explained that “Christ had
laid down the yoke he had borne for the sins of men,
and  that  I  should  take  it  on  and  fight  against  the
Serpent,  for  the  time  was  fast  approaching  when  the
first should be last and the last should be first.” Taking
an eclipse of the sun in August 1831 as an omen, Turner
and a handful of relatives and friends rose in rebellion
and killed at least 55 white men, women, and children.
Turner hoped that hundreds of slaves would rally to his
cause, but he mustered only 60 men. The white militia
quickly  dispersed  his  poorly  armed  force  and  took
their revenge. One company of cavalry killed 40 blacks
in two days and put 15 of their heads on poles to warn

“all those who should undertake a similar plot.” Turner
died by hanging, still identifying his mission with that
of his Savior. “Was not Christ crucified?” he asked.

Deeply shaken by Turner’s Rebellion, the Virginia
assembly  debated  a  law  providing  for  gradual  eman-
cipation  and  colonization  abroad.  When  the  bill
failed by a vote of 73 to 58, the possibility that southern
planters  would  voluntarily  end  slavery  was  gone  for-
ever. Instead, the southern states toughened their slave
codes, limited black movement, and prohibited anyone
from teaching slaves to read. They would meet Walker’s
radical Appeal with radical measures of their own.

Evangelical Abolitionism
Rejecting  Walker’s  and  Turner’s  resort  to  violence,  a
cadre  of  northern  evangelical  Christians  launched  a
moral crusade to abolish the slave regime. If planters
did  not  allow  blacks  their  God-given  status  as  free

The Anti-Slavery Alphabet

Girding themselves for a long ﬁght, abolitionists conveyed their beliefs to the next generation. This
primer, written by Quakers Hannah and Mary Townsend and published in Philadelphia in 1846, taught
young children the alphabet by spreading the antislavery message. “A” was for “Abolitionist,” and “B”
was for a “Brother,” an enslaved black who, though of a “darker hue,” was considered by God “as dear
as you.” The Huntington Library & Art Collections, San Marino, CA.

