362

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

moral  agents,  these  radical  Christians  warned,  they
faced eternal damnation at the hands of a just God.

William  Lloyd  Garrison,  Theodore  Weld,  and
Angelina and Sarah Grimké  The most determined
abolitionist was William Lloyd Garrison (1805–1879).
A  Massachusetts-born  printer,  Garrison  had  worked
during the 1820s in Baltimore on an antislavery news-
paper, the Genius of Universal Emancipation. In 1830,
Garrison  went  to  jail,  convicted  of  libeling  a  New
England merchant engaged in the domestic slave trade.
In 1831, Garrison moved to Boston, where he immedi-
ately  started  his  own  weekly,  The  Liberator  (1831–
1865),  and  founded  the  New  England  Anti-Slavery
Society.

Influenced  by  a  bold  pamphlet,  Immediate,  Not
Gradual  Abolition  (1824),  by  an  English  Quaker,
Elizabeth  Coltman  Heyrick,  Garrison  demanded
immediate  abolition  without  compensation  to  slave-
holders. “I will not retreat a single inch,” he declared,
“and I will be heard.” Garrison accused the Amer-
ican Colonization Society (Chapter 8) of perpetuating
slavery  and  assailed  the  U.S.  Constitution  as  “a  cove-
nant with death and an agreement with Hell” because it
implicitly accepted racial bondage.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did the ideology and
tactics of the Garrisonian
abolitionists differ from
those of the antislavery
movements discussed in
Chapters 6 and 8?

In 1833, Garrison, Theodore Weld, and sixty other
religious abolitionists, black and white, established the
American Anti-Slavery Society. The society won finan-
cial  support  from  Arthur  and
Lewis  Tappan,  wealthy  silk  mer-
chants in New York City. Women
abolitionists  established  separate
groups,  including  the  Philadel-
phia Female Anti-Slavery Society,
founded by Lucretia Mott in 1833,
and the Anti-Slavery Conventions
of  American  Women,  a  network
of  local  societies.  The  women
raised money for The Liberator and carried the move-
ment  to  the  farm  villages  and  small  towns  of  the
Midwest, where they distributed abolitionist literature
and  collected  thousands  of  signatures  on  antislavery
petitions.

Abolitionist leaders launched a three-pronged plan
of attack. To win the support of religious Americans,
Weld published The Bible Against Slavery (1837), which
used passages from Christianity’s holiest book to dis-
credit slavery. Two years later, Weld teamed up with the
Grimké  sisters — Angelina,  whom  he  married,  and
Sarah. The Grimkés had left their father’s plantation in
South Carolina, converted to Quakerism, and taken up
the  abolitionist  cause  in  Philadelphia.  In  American

Slavery  as  It  Is:  Testimony  of  a  Thousand  Witnesses
(1839),  Weld  and  the  Grimkés  addressed  a  simple
question: “What is the actual condition of the slaves in
the United States?” Using reports from southern news-
papers and firsthand testimony, they presented incrim-
inating  evidence  of  the  inherent  violence  of  slavery.
Angelina  Grimké  told  of  a  treadmill  that  South
Carolina slave owners used for punishment: “One poor
girl, [who was] sent there to be flogged, and who was
accordingly stripped naked and whipped, showed me
the  deep  gashes  on  her  back — I  might  have  laid  my
whole finger in them — large pieces of flesh had actu-
ally been cut out by the torturing lash.” Filled with such
images of pain and suffering, the book sold more than
100,000 copies in a single year.

The  American  Anti-Slavery  Society  To  spread
their  message,  the  abolitionists  turned  to  mass  com-
munication. Using new steam-powered presses to print
a million pamphlets, the American Anti-Slavery Society
carried out a “great postal campaign” in 1835, flooding
the nation, including the South, with its literature.

The abolitionists’ second tactic was to aid fugitive
slaves.  They  provided  lodging  and  jobs  for  escaped
blacks  in  free  states  and  created  the  Underground
Railroad, an informal network of whites and free blacks
in  Richmond,  Charleston,  and  other  southern  towns
that assisted fugitives (Map 11.3). In Baltimore, a free
African  American  sailor  loaned  his  identification
papers to future abolitionist Frederick Douglass, who
used them to escape to New York. Harriet Tubman and
other  runaways  risked  re-enslavement  or  death  by
returning repeatedly to the South to help others escape.
“I  should  fight  for . . . liberty  as  long  as  my  strength
lasted,” Tubman explained, “and when the time came
for me to go, the Lord would let them take me.” Thanks
to the Railroad, about one thousand African Americans
reached freedom in the North each year.

There, they faced an uncertain future because most
whites  continued  to  reject  civic  or  social  equality  for
African  Americans.  Voters  in  six  northern  and  mid-
western  states  adopted  constitutional  amendments
that denied or limited the franchise for free blacks. “We
want  no  masters,”  declared  a  New  York  artisan,  “and
least  of  all  no  negro  masters.”  Moreover,  the  Fugitive
Slave Law (1793) allowed owners and their hired slave
catchers to seize suspected runaways and return them
to bondage. To thwart these efforts, white abolitionists
and free blacks formed mobs that attacked slave catch-
ers, released their captives, and often spirited them off
to  British-ruled  Canada,  which  refused  to  extradite
fugitive slaves.

