CHAPTER 11

  Religion and Reform, 1800–1860

363

C A N A D A

The Underground Railroad helped runaway slaves
to leave the South and find refuge either in Canada
or in remote northern towns where professional
slave catchers rarely ventured.

MINNESOTA

L. Superior

St. Lawrence R.

VT.

MAINE

WIS.

Mississip
i R.

p

IOWA

n
a
g
i
h
c
i

M
.
L

L. Hur

o
n

L. Ontario

NEW
YORK

MICH.

L. Erie

PA.

H
u
d
s
o
n

 R.

N.J.

N.H.
(cid:2)

(cid:37)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:81)

R.I.
CONN.

N

W

E

S

MASS.

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

OHIO

MD.

DEL.

This map shows free and slave
areas as determined by state and
territorial constitutions and laws.

ILLINOIS

Missouri R.

MISSOURI

ARKANSAS

IND.

Ohio R.

KY.

TENN.

VIRGINIA

NORTH
CAROLINA

S.C.

MISS.

ALA.

GEORGIA

(cid:2)

(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:81)

NEBRASKA
TERRITORY

UNORG.
TERR.

Most fugitives fled from such
states as Maryland, Kentucky,
and Missouri that bordered free
territory. However, a significant
number of slaves escaped from
the Lower South on boats engaged
in the coastal trade.

Arkansas R.

KANSAS
TERRITORY

NEW MEXICO
TERRITORY

UNORG.
TERRITORY
Red R.

TEXAS

LA.

FLA.

M E X I C O

Gulf of Mexico

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

0

0

The routes of the Underground
Railroad system are conjectural;
the surviving evidence mainly
identifies the “stations” and the
“destinations” of the system, not
the “tracks” that connected them.

Statistics indicating the percentage
of slaves in each county come from
the U.S. census of 1850.

Free states
Slave states
Areas with slave populations
of 50% or more in 1850
Routes of the
Underground Railroad

MAP 11.3
The Underground Railroad in the 1850s

Before 1840, most African Americans who ﬂed slavery did so on their own or with the help of
family and friends. Thereafter, they could count on support from members of the Underground
Railroad. Provided with food and directions by free blacks in the South, fugitive slaves crossed into
free states. There, they received protection and shelter from abolitionists who arranged for their
transportation to Canada or to “safe” American cities and towns.

A political campaign was the final element of the
abolitionists’  program.  Between  1835  and  1838,  the
American  Anti-Slavery  Society  bombarded  Congress
with  petitions  containing  nearly  500,000  signatures.
They demanded the abolition of slavery in the District
of Columbia, an end to the interstate slave trade, and a
ban on admission of new slave states.

Thousands of deeply religious farmers and small-
town proprietors supported these efforts. The number
of local abolitionist societies grew from two hundred
in 1835 to two thousand by 1840, with nearly 200,000
members, including many transcendentalists. Emerson
condemned  Americans  for  supporting  slavery,  and
Thoreau, viewing the Mexican War as a naked scheme
to extend slavery, refused to pay taxes and submitted to
arrest.  In  1848,  he  published  “Resistance  to  Civil

Government,”  an  essay  urging  individuals  to  follow
a  higher  moral  law.  The  black  abolitionist  Henry
Highland Garnet went further; his Address to the Slaves
of the United States of America (1841) called for “Liberty
or  Death”  and  urged  slave  “Resistance!  Resistance!
Resistance!”

Opposition and Internal Conflict
Still,  abolitionists  remained  a  minority,  even  among
churchgoers.  Perhaps  10  percent  of  northerners  and
midwesterners strongly supported the movement, and
only another 20 percent were sympathetic to its goals.

Attacks  on  Abolitionism  Slavery’s  proponents
were  more  numerous  and  equally  aggressive.  The

