364

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

“The Negro in His Own
Country” Versus “The
Negro in America”

Slave owners and their intellectual
and religious allies responded to
abolitionists’ attacks by defending
slavery as a “positive good.” These
two images, from Josiah Priest’s Bible
Defence of Slavery (1852), support
the argument that enslavement saved
Africans from a savage, war-ridden
life (note the skeleton in the top
image) and exposed them to the
civilized world. Such publications
achieved wide circulation and
popularity among the planter
classes. Chicago History Museum.

abolitionists’  agitation,  ministers  warned,  risked
“embroiling  neighborhoods  and  families — setting
friend against friend, overthrowing churches and insti-
tutions of learning, embittering one portion of the land
against the other.” Wealthy men feared that the attack
on slave property might become an assault on all prop-
erty  rights,  conservative  clergy-
men condemned the public roles
assumed  by  abolitionist  women,
and northern wage earners feared
that freed blacks would work for
lower  wages  and  take  their  jobs.
Underlining  the  national  “reach”
of slavery, northern merchants and textile manufactur-
ers  supported  the  southern  planters  who  supplied
them with cotton, as did hog farmers in Ohio, Indiana,
and  Illinois  and  pork  packers  in  Cincinnati  and

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Which groups of Americans
opposed the abolitionists,
and why did they do so?

Chicago  who  profited  from  lucrative  sales  to  slave
plantations. Finally, whites almost universally opposed
“amalgamation,”  the  racial  mixing  and  intermarriage
that Garrison seemed to support by holding meetings
of blacks and whites of both sexes.

Racial fears and hatreds led to violent mob actions.
White workers in northern towns laid waste to taverns
and brothels where blacks and whites mixed, and they
vandalized  “respectable”  African  American  churches,
temperance halls, and orphanages. In 1833, a mob of
1,500  New  Yorkers  stormed  a  church  in  search  of
Garrison and Arthur Tappan. Another white mob swept
through  Philadelphia’s  African  American  neighbor-
hoods, clubbing and stoning residents and destroying
homes and churches. In 1835, “gentlemen of property
and  standing” — lawyers,  merchants,  and  bankers —
broke  up  an  abolitionist  convention  in  Utica,  New

