CHAPTER 11

  Religion and Reform, 1800–1860

365

York. Two years later, a mob in Alton, Illinois, shot and
killed Elijah P. Lovejoy, editor of the abolitionist Alton
Observer.  By  pressing  for  emancipation  and  equality,
the abolitionists had revealed the extent of racial preju-
dice  and  had  heightened  race  consciousness,  as  both
whites  and  blacks  identified  across  class  lines  with
members of their own race.

Racial solidarity was especially strong in the South,
where whites banned abolitionists. The Georgia legis-
lature offered a $5,000 reward for kidnapping Garrison
and bringing him to the South to be tried (or lynched)
for inciting rebellion. In Nashville, vigilantes whipped
a northern college student for distributing abolitionist
pamphlets;  in  Charleston,  a  mob  attacked  the  post
office  and  destroyed  sacks  of  abolitionist  mail.  After

1835,  southern  postmasters  simply  refused  to  deliver
mail suspected to be of abolitionist origin.

Politicians  joined  the  fray.  President  Andrew
Jackson,  a  longtime  slave  owner,  asked  Congress  in
1835  to  restrict  the  use  of  the  mails  by  abolitionist
groups.  Congress  refused,  but  in  1836,  the  House  of
Representatives adopted the so-called gag rule. Under
this informal agreement, which remained in force until
1844, the House automatically tabled antislavery peti-
tions, keeping the explosive issue of slavery off the con-
gressional stage.

Internal  Divisions  Assailed  by  racists  from  the
outside, evangelical abolitionists fought among them-
selves over gender issues. Many antislavery clergymen

The Complexities of Race

This cartoon takes aim at Richard Mentor Johnson of Kentucky, the distraught man being comforted by
abolitionists Frederick Douglass and William Lloyd Garrison. A longtime congressman and senator, Johnson
was the Democrats’ vice-presidential candidate in 1836. Although the party stood for the South and
slavery — and condemned mixed-race unions — Johnson lived openly with an African American woman, Julia
Chinn, whose daughters hold her portrait. Future Supreme Court justice John Catron noted with disgust that
Johnson tried “to force his daughters into society” and that they and their mother “claimed equality.” Racial
prejudice cost Johnson some votes, but he won a plurality in the electoral college, and, on a party-line vote,
Democrats in the Senate elected him Martin Van Buren’s vice president. Library of Congress.

