366

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

opposed an activist role for women, but Garrison had
broadened his reform agenda to include pacifism, the
abolition of prisons, and women’s rights: “Our object is
universal  emancipation,  to  redeem  women  as  well  as
men  from  a  servile  to  an  equal  condition.”  In  1840,
Garrison’s  demand  that  the  American  Anti-Slavery
Society  support  women’s  rights  split  the  abolitionist
movement. Abby Kelley, Lucretia Mott, and Elizabeth
Cady Stanton, among others, remained with Garrison
in the American Anti-Slavery Society and assailed both
the institutions that bound blacks and the customs that
constrained free women.

Garrison’s opponents founded a new organization,
the American and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, which
turned  to  politics.  Its  members  mobilized  their
churches to oppose racial bondage and organized the
Liberty  Party,  the  first  antislavery  political  party.  In
1840, the new party nominated James G. Birney, a for-
mer  Alabama  slave  owner,  for  president.  Birney  and
the Liberty Party argued that the Constitution did not
recognize slavery and, consequently, that slaves became
free when they entered areas of federal authority, such
as the District of Columbia and the national territories.
However, Birney won few votes, and the future of polit-
ical abolitionism appeared dim.

Popular  violence  in  the  North,  government-aided
suppression in the South, and internal schisms stunned
the  abolitionist  movement.  By  melding  the  energies
and ideas of evangelical Protestants, moral reformers,
and transcendentalists, it had raised the banner of anti-
slavery to new heights, only to face a hostile backlash.
“When we first unfurled the banner of The Liberator,”

Garrison admitted, “it did not occur to us that nearly
every  religious  sect,  and  every  political  party  would
side with the oppressor.”

The Women’s Rights
Movement
The  prominence  of  women  among  the  abolitionists
reflected a broad shift in American culture. By joining
religious  revivals  and  reform  movements,  women
entered public life. Their activism caused many gender
issues — sexual behavior, marriage, family authority —
to  become  subjects  of  debate.  The  debate  entered  a
new  phase  in  1848,  when  some  reformers  focused
on  women’s  rights  and  demanded  complete  equality
with men.

Origins of the Women’s Movement
“Don’t  be  afraid,  not  afraid,  fight  Satan;  stand  up  for
Christ; don’t be afraid.” So spoke Mary Walker Ostram
on  her  deathbed  in  1859.  Her  religious  convictions
were as firm at the age of fifty-eight as they had been in
1816, when she joined the first Sunday school in Utica,
New York. Married to a lawyer-politician and childless,
Ostram had devoted her life to evangelical Presby ter-
ianism  and  its  program  of  benevolent  social  reform.
At  her  funeral,  minister  Philemon  Fowler  celebrated
Ostram as a “living fountain” of faith, an exemplar of
“Women’s Sphere of Influence” in the world.

A Nineteenth-Century
Middle-Class Family

Whereas colonial-era families were large,
often with six to eight children, nineteenth-
century middle-class couples, such as Azariah
and Eliza Caverly, pictured here in 1836 by
Joseph H. Davis (1811–1865), consciously
limited their fertility, treated their spouses
with affection, and carefully supervised the
education of their children. The Caverlys’
daughter ﬁngers a Bible, suggesting her
future moral responsibilities as a mother,
while their son holds a square ruler, either
indicating Azariah’s profession or foreshadow-
ing the son’s career as a prosperous architect
or engineer. Fenimore Art Museum, Cooperstown,
New York.

