Although  Reverend  Fowler  heaped  praise  on
Ostram, he rejected a public presence for women. Like
men of the Revolutionary era, Fowler thought women
should limit their political role to that  of “republican
mother,”  instructing  “their  sons  in  the  principles  of
liberty  and  government.”  Women  inhabited  a  “sepa-
rate sphere” of domestic life, he said, and had no place
in  “the  markets  of  trade,  the  scenes  of  politics  and
popular agitation, the courts of justice and the halls of
legislation. Home is her peculiar sphere.”

However,  Ostram  and  many  other  middle-class
women  were  redefining  the  notion  of  the  domestic
sphere  by  becoming  active  in  their  churches.  Their
spiritual activism bolstered their authority within the
household  and  gave  them  new  influence  over  many
areas  of  family  life,  including  the  timing  of  pregnan-
cies. Publications such as Godey’s Lady’s Book, a popu-
lar monthly periodical, and Catharine Beecher’s Treatise
on  Domestic  Economy  (1841)  taught  women  how  to
make their homes examples of middle-class efficiency
and  domesticity.  Women  in  propertied  farm  families
were equally vigilant and carried domestic issues into
the public sphere. To protect their homes and husbands
from  alcoholic  excess,  they  joined  the  Independ ent
Order  of  Good  Templars,  a  temperance  group  which
made women full members (American Voices, p. 368).

Moral  Reform  Some religious women developed a
sharp  consciousness  of  gender  and  became  public
actors. In 1834, middle-class women in New York City
founded the Female Moral Reform Society and elected
Lydia Finney, the wife of revivalist Charles Grandison
Finney, as its president. The society tried to curb pros-
titution  and  to  protect  single  women  from  moral
corruption.  Rejecting  the  sexual  double  standard,  its
members demanded chaste behavior by men. By 1840,
the Female Moral Reform Society had blossomed into
a  national  association,  with  555  chapters  and  40,000
members throughout the North and Midwest. Employ-
ing only women as agents, the society provided moral
guidance for young women who were working as fac-
tory operatives, seamstresses, or servants. Society mem-
bers visited brothels, where they sang hymns, offered
prayers,  searched  for  runaway  girls,  and  noted  the
names of clients. They also founded homes of refuge for
prostitutes and won the passage of laws in Massachusetts
and New York that made seduction a crime.

Improving  Prisons,  Creating Asylums,  Expanding
Education  Other women set out to improve public
institutions, and Dorothea Dix (1801–1887) was their
model.  Dix’s  paternal  grandparents  were  prominent
Bostonians, but her father, a Methodist minister, ended

CHAPTER 11

  Religion and Reform, 1800–1860

367

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
Using the material on
women’s lives in Chap-
ters 4, 8, and 11, analyze
and explain the changing
nature of their “private”
and “public” lives.

up  an  impoverished  alcoholic.
Emo tionally  abused  as  a  child,
Dix  grew  into  a  compassionate
young woman with a strong sense
of  moral  purpose.  She  used
money from her grandparents to
set  up  charity  schools  to  “rescue
some of America’s miserable chil-
dren  from  vice”  and  became  a
successful  author.  By  1832,  she  had  published  seven
books,  including  Conversations  on  Common  Things
(1824),  an  enormously  successful  treatise  on  natural
science and moral improvement.

In 1841, Dix took up a new cause. Discovering that
insane  women  were  jailed  alongside  male  criminals,
she persuaded Massachusetts lawmakers to enlarge the
state hospital to house indigent mental patients. Exhil-
arated by that success, Dix began a national movement
to establish state asylums for the mentally ill. By 1854,
she had traveled more than 30,000 miles and had vis-
ited eighteen state penitentiaries, three hundred county
jails,  and  more  than  five  hundred  almshouses  and
hospitals. Dix’s reports and agitation prompted many
states to improve their prisons and public hospitals.

Both  as  reformers  and  teachers,  other  northern
women transformed public education. From Maine to
Wisconsin,  women  vigorously  supported  the  move-
ment  led  by  Horace  Mann  to  increase  elementary
schooling  and  improve  the  quality  of  instruction.  As
secretary  of  the  Massachusetts  Board  of  Education
from 1837 to 1848, Mann lengthened the school year;
established  teaching  standards  in  reading,  writing,
and arithmetic; and recruited well-educated women as
teachers.  The  intellectual  leader  of  the  new  women
educators was Catharine Beecher, who founded acade-
mies for young women in Hartford, Connecticut, and
Cincinnati, Ohio. In widely read publications, Beecher
argued  that  “energetic  and  benevolent  women”  were
better  qualified  than  men  were  to  impart  moral  and
intellectual  instruction  to  the  young.  By  the  1850s,
most teachers were women, both because local school
boards heeded Beecher’s arguments and because they
could hire women at lower salaries than men. As secu-
lar educators as well as moral reformers, women were
now part of American public life.

From Black Rights to Women’s Rights
As  women  addressed  controversial  issues  such  as
moral  reform  and  emancipation,  they  faced  censure
over their public presence. Offended by this criticism,
which  revealed  their  own  social  and  legal  inferiority,
some women sought full freedom for their sex.

