A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Saving the Nation

from Drink

The temperance crusade was the most successful antebellum reform movement.
It mobilized more than a million supporters in all sections of the nation and sig-
niﬁcantly  lowered  the  consumption  of  alcoholic  beverages.  Nonetheless,  like
other reform efforts, the antidrinking crusade divided over questions of strategy
and tactics. The following passages, taken from the writings of leading temper-
ance advocates, show that some reformers favored legal regulation while others
preferred persuasion and voluntary abstinence.

Lyman Beecher
“Intemperance Is the Sin of Our Land”

A  leading  Protestant  minister  and  spokesman  for  the
Benevolent Empire, Lyman Beecher regarded drunkenness
as a sin. His Six Sermons on . . . Intemperance (1829) con-
demned  the  recklessness  of  working-class  drunkards  and
called on responsible members of the middle class to lead
the way to a temperate society.

Intemperance is the sin of our land, and, with our bound-
less prosperity, is coming in upon us like a flood; and if
anything shall defeat the hopes of the world, which hang
upon our experiment of civil liberty, it is that river of
fire. . . .

In every city and town the poor-tax, created chiefly
by intemperance, is [increasing the burden on taxpaying
citizens]. . . . The frequency of going upon the town [rely-
ing on public welfare] has taken away the reluctance of
pride, and destroyed the motives to providence which
the fear of poverty and suffering once supplied. The pros-
pect of a destitute old age, or of a suffering family, no
longer troubles the vicious portion of our community.
They drink up their daily earnings, and bless God for
the poor-house, and begin to look upon it as, of right,
the drunkard’s home. . . . Every intemperate and idle
man, whom you behold tottering about the streets and
steeping himself at the stores, regards your houses and
lands as pledged to take care of him, puts his hands
deep, annually, into your pockets. . . .

What then is this universal, natural, and national
remedy for intemperance? it is the banishment of
ardent spirits from the list of lawful articles
of commerce, by a correct and efficient public
sentiment; such as has turned slavery out of half
our land, and will yet expel it from the world.
We are not therefore to come down in wrath upon

the distillers, and importers, and venders of ardent
spirits. None of us are enough without sin to cast the
first stone. . . . It is the buyers who have created the

demand for ardent spirits, and made distillation and
importation a gainful traffic. . . . Let the temperate cease
to buy — and the demand for ardent spirits will fall in the
market three fourths, and ultimately will fail wholly. . . .
This however cannot be done effectually so long as
the traffic in ardent spirits is regarded as lawful, and is
patronized by men of reputation and moral worth in
every part of the land. Like slavery, it must be regarded
as sinful, impolitic, and dishonorable. That no measures
will avail short of rendering ardent spirits a contraband
of trade, is nearly self-evident.

Abraham Lincoln
“A New Class of Champions”

In  Baltimore  in  1840,  a  group  of  reformed  alcoholics
formed the Washington Temperance Society, which turned
the antidrinking movement in a new direction. By talking
publicly  about  their  personal  experiences  of  alcoholic
decline and spiritual recovery, they inspired thousands to
“sign the pledge” of total abstinence. (Its philosophy exists
today in the organization Alcoholics Anonymous.) In 1842,
Lincoln, an ambitious lawyer and Illinois legislator who did
not drink, praised such “moral suasion” in an address to
the Washingtonians of Springﬁeld, Illinois.

Although the temperance cause has been in progress for
near twenty years, it is apparent to all that it is just now
being crowned with a degree of success hitherto unparal-
leled. The list of its friends is daily swelled by the additions
of fifties, of hundreds, and of thousands.

The warfare heretofore waged against the demon
intemperance has somehow or other been erroneous. . . .
[Its] champions for the most part have been preachers
[such as Beecher], lawyers, and hired agents. Between
these and the mass of mankind there is a want of
approach ability. . . .

But when one who has long been known as a victim
of intemperance bursts the fetters that have bound him,

368

