and appears before his neighbors “clothed and in his right
mind,”  . . . to tell of the miseries once endured, now to be
endured no more  . . . there is a logic and an eloquence in
it that few with human feelings can resist. . . .

In my judgment, it is to the battles of this new class of
champions that our late success is greatly, perhaps chiefly,
owing. . . . [Previously,] too much denunciation against
dram-sellers and dram-drinkers was indulged in. This I
think was both impolitic and unjust. . . . When the dram-
seller and drinker were incessantly [condemned] . . . as
moral pestilences . . . they were slow [to] . . . join the
ranks of their denouncers in a hue and cry against
themselves.

By the Washingtonians this system of consigning the
habitual drunkard to hopeless ruin is repudiated. . . . They
teach hope to all — despair to none. As applying to their
cause, they deny the doctrine of unpardonable sin. . . .
If the relative grandeur of revolutions shall be esti-

mated by the great amount of human misery they
alleviate, and the small amount they inflict, then indeed
will this be the grandest the world shall ever have seen.
Of our political revolution of ’76 we are all justly proud.
It has given us a degree of political freedom far exceed-
ing that of any other nation of the earth. . . . But, with
all these glorious results, past, present, and to come, [this
freedom] had its evils too. It [was abused by drunken
husbands and thereby] breathed forth famine, swam in
blood, and rode in fire; and long, long after, the orphan’s
cry and the widow’s wail continued to break the sad
silence that ensued. These were the price, the inevitable
price, paid for the blessings it brought. . . .

Turn now to the temperance revolution. In it we shall
find a stronger bondage broken, a viler slavery manumit-
ted, a greater tyrant deposed; in it, more of want supplied,
more disease healed, more sorrow assuaged. By it no
orphans starving, no widows weeping.

Glorious consummation! Hail, fall of fury! Reign of

reason, all hail!

American Temperance Magazine
“You Shall Not Sell”

In 1851, the Maine legislature passed a statute prohibiting
the  sale  of  alcoholic  beverages  in  the  state.  The  Maine
Supreme Court upheld the statute, arguing that the legis-
lature  had  the  “right  to  regulate  by  law  the  sale  of
any  article,  the  use  of  which  would  be  detrimental  of

the  morals  of  the  people.”  Subsequently,  the  American
Temperance Magazine became a strong advocate of legal
prohibition  and  by  1856  had  won  passage  of  “Maine
Laws” in twelve other states (Chapter 9).

This is a utilitarian age. The speculative has in all things
yielded to the practical. Words are mere noise unless
they are things [and result in action].

In this sense, moral suasion is moral balderdash.
“Words, my lord, words” . . . are a delusion. . . . The
drunkard’s mental and physical condition pronounces
them an absurdity. He is ever in one or other extreme —
under the excitement of drink, or in a state of morbid
collapse. . . . Reason with a man when all reason has
fled, and it is doubtful whether he or you is the greater
fool. . . . Moral suasion! Bah!

Place this man we have been describing out of the
reach of temptation. He will have time to ponder. His
mind and frame recover their native vigor. The public-
house does not beset his path. . . . Thus, and thus only,
will reformation and temperance be secured. And how is
this accomplished? Never except through the instrumen-
tality of the law. If it were possible to reason the drunkard
into sobriety, it would not be possible to make the rum-
seller forego his filthy gains. Try your moral suasion on
him. . . . The only logic he will comprehend, is some such
ordinance as this, coming to him in the shape and with
the voice of law — you shall not sell.

Source: David Brion Davis, Antebellum American Culture: An Interpretive Anthology
(University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1997), 395–398, 403–409.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  What does Lincoln’s address suggest about his general

political philosophy?

2.  Compare Beecher’s position to Lincoln’s. In what ways

are they similar? How are they different? Then compare
Beecher’s solution to that of the American Temper-
ance Magazine. Are they the same? Whose view of
personal responsibility versus institutional coercion is
closest to the position of Orestes Brownson (Chapter 9,
pp. 308–309)?

3.  In which of these selections do you see the inﬂuence of
the Second Great Awakening, especially the evangeli-
cal message of Charles Grandison Finney? Where do
you see the inﬂuence of the Market Revolution and the
cultural values of the rising middle class? What positions
do these selections take with respect to the appropriate
role of government in regulating morality and personal
behavior?

369

