370

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Abolitionist  Women  Women  were  central  to  the
antislavery  movement  because  they  understood  the
special horrors of slavery for women. In her autobiog-
raphy, Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, black aboli-
tionist  Harriet  Jacobs  described  forced  sexual  inter-
course with her white owner. “I cannot tell how much I
suffered  in  the  presence  of  these  wrongs,”  she  wrote.
According to Jacobs and other enslaved women, such
sexual assaults incited additional cruelty by their own-
ers’ wives, who were enraged by their husbands’ pro-
miscuity. In her best-selling novel, Uncle Tom’s Cabin
(1852),  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe  pinpointed  the  sexual
abuse  of  women  as  a  profound  moral  failing  of  the
slave regime.

As Garrisonian women attacked slavery, they fre-
quently  violated  social  taboos  by  speaking  to  mixed
audiences  of  men  and  women.  Maria  W.  Stewart,  an
African American, spoke to mixed crowds in Boston in
the early 1830s. As abolitionism blossomed, scores of
white  women  delivered  lectures  condemning  slavery,
and  thousands  more  made  home  “visitations”  to  win
converts to their cause (Map 11.4). When Congre ga-
tionalist clergymen in New England assailed Angelina
and  Sarah  Grimké  for  such  activism  in  a  Pastoral
Letter  in  1837,  Sarah  Grimké  turned  to  the  Bible  for
justification: “The Lord Jesus defines the duties of his

followers in his Sermon on the Mount . . . without any
reference  to  sex  or  condition,”  she  replied:  “Men  and
women  were  created  equal;  both  are  moral  and
accountable  beings  and  whatever  is  right  for  man  to
do,  is  right  for  woman.”  In  a  pamphlet  debate  with
Catharine Beecher (who believed that women should
exercise  authority  primarily  as  wives,  mothers,  and
schoolteachers),  Angelina  Grimké  pushed  the  argu-
ment  beyond  religion  by  invoking  Enlightenment
principles to claim equal civic rights:

It  is  a  woman’s  right  to  have  a  voice  in  all  the  laws
and  regulations  by  which  she  is  governed,  whether
in  Church  or  State. . . . The  present  arrangements
of  society  on  these  points  are  a  violation  of  human
rights, a rank usurpation of power, a violent seizure
and confiscation of what is sacredly and inalienably
hers.

By  1840,  female  abolitionists  were  asserting  that
traditional gender roles resulted in the domestic slav-
ery of women. “How can we endure our present mar-
riage relations,” asked Elizabeth Cady Stanton, “[which
give a woman] no charter of rights, no individuality of
her own?” As reformer Ernestine Rose put it: “The rad-
ical  difficulty . . . is  that  women  are  considered  as
belonging to men.” Having acquired a public voice and

MAP 11.4
Women and Antislavery, 1837–1838

Beginning in the 1830s, abolitionists
and antislavery advocates dispatched
dozens of petitions to Congress
demanding an end to forced labor.
Women accounted for two-thirds
of the 67,000 signatures on the
petitions submitted in 1837–1838,
a fact that suggests not only the
inﬂuence of women in the anti-
slavery movement but also the
extent of female organizations
and social networks. Lawmakers,
eager to avoid sectional conﬂict,
devised an informal agreement
(the “gag rule”) to table the peti-
tions without discussion.

L. Superior

C A N A D A

IOWA
TERRITORY

Misso

u
r
i
R

.

WISCONSIN
TERRITORY

Mississi
 R.

p
p
i

n
a
g
i
h
c
i
M
L

.

L. Hur

o
n

MICHIGAN

120

535

L. Erie

5,887

OHIO

1,189

66

266
ILLINOIS

IND.

UNORG.
TERR.

MISSOURI

ARKANSAS

Ohio R.

KY.

TENN.

5,537

VIRGINIA

N.C.

S.C.

MISS.

ALABAMA

GEORGIA

LA.

REPUBLIC
OF
TEXAS

Gulf of Mexico

(after Opdycke)

FLA.
TERR.

N

W

E

S

MAINE

671

VT.

1,792

L. Ontario

852

N.Y.

2,088

N.H.

625

MASS.

908

R.I.

CONN.

8,369

PA.

3.061

N.J.

DEL.

MD.

35,236

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

Antislavery Petitions
to Congress, 1837–38

Female signers

Male signers

Total signers
67,202     100%
Female signers  44,929       67%
22,273       33%
Male signers

