CHAPTER 11

  Religion and Reform, 1800–1860

371

political  skills  in  the  crusade  for  African  American
freedom,  thousands  of  northern  women  now  advo-
cated greater rights for themselves.

Seneca Falls and Beyond  During the 1840s, wom-
en’s  rights  activists  devised  a  pragmatic  program  of
reform. Unlike radical utopians, they did not challenge
the institution of marriage or the conventional division
of  labor  within  the  family.  Instead,  they  tried  to
strengthen the legal rights of married women by seek-
ing  legislation  that  permitted  them  to  own  property
(America Compared, p. 372). This initiative won cru-
cial support from affluent men, who feared bankruptcy
in  the  volatile  market  economy  and  wanted  to  put

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What was the relationship
between the abolition-
ist and women’s rights
movements?

some family assets in their wives’
names. Fathers also desired their
married  daughters  to  have  prop-
erty  rights  to  protect  them  (and
their paternal  inheritances)  from
financially
irresponsible  hus-
bands.  Such  motives  prompted
legislatures  in  three  states — Mississippi,  Maine,  and
Massachusetts — to  enact  married  women’s  property
laws between 1839 and 1845. Then, women activists in
New  York  won  a  comprehensive  statute  that  became
the model for fourteen other states. The New York stat-
ute  of  1848  gave  women  full  legal  control  over  the
property they brought to a marriage.

Also in 1848, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia
Mott organized a gathering of women’s rights activists
in  the  small  New  York  town  of  Seneca  Falls.  Seventy
women  and  thirty  men  attended  the  Seneca  Falls
Convention, which issued a rousing manifesto extend-
ing  to  women  the  egalitarian  republican  ideology  of
the Declaration of Independence. “All men and women
are  created  equal,”  the  Declaration  of  Sentiments
declared, “[yet] the history of mankind is a history of
repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man
toward woman [and] the establishment of an absolute
tyranny over her.” To persuade Americans to right this
long-standing wrong, the activists resolved to “employ
agents, circulate tracts, petition the State and National
legislatures, and endeavor to enlist the pulpit and the
press on our behalf.” By staking out claims for equality
for  women  in  public  life,  the  Seneca  Falls  reformers
repudiated both the natural inferiority of women and
the ideology of separate spheres.

Most men dismissed the Seneca Falls declaration as
nonsense, and many women also rejected the activists
and their message. In her diary, one small-town mother
and housewife lashed out at the female reformer who
“aping mannish manners . . . wears absurd and barba-
rous attire, who talks of her wrongs in harsh tone, who
struts  and  strides,  and  thinks  that  she  proves  herself
superior to the rest of her sex.”

Still, the women’s rights movement grew in strength
and  purpose.  In  1850,  delegates  to  the  first  national
women’s rights convention in Worcester, Massachusetts,
hammered out a program of action. The women called
on churches to eliminate notions of female inferiority
in  their  theology.  Addressing  state  legislatures,  they
proposed  laws  to  allow  married  women  to  institute
lawsuits, testify in court, and assume custody of their
children in the event of divorce or a husband’s death.
Finally,  they  began  a  concerted  campaign  to  win  the
vote for women. As delegates to the 1851 convention

Crusading Reformers

Elizabeth Cady Stanton (1815–1902) and Susan B.
Anthony (1820–1906) were a dynamic duo. Stanton,
the well-educated daughter of a prominent New York
judge, was an early abolitionist and the mother of seven
children. Anthony came from a Quaker family and became
a teacher and a temperance activist. Meeting in 1851,
Stanton and Anthony became friends and co-organizers.
From 1854 to 1860, they led a successful struggle to
expand New York’s Married Women’s Property Law of
1848. During the Civil War, they formed the Women’s
Loyal National League, which helped win passage of the
Thirteenth Amendment, ending slavery. In 1866, they joined
the American Equal Rights Association, which demanded the
vote for women and African Americans. © Bettmann/Corbis.

