A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Women’s Rights

in France and the

United States, 1848

During the political uprising in France in 1848, Pauline Roland and Jeanne Dero-
ine  unsuccessfully  sought  voting  rights  and  an  equal  civil  status  for  French
women.  However,  the  two  women  won  election  to  the  Central  Committee  of
the  Associative  Unions,  the  umbrella  organization  of  French  trade  unions.
Imprisoned for their activism, they dispatched a letter to the Second Woman’s
Rights Convention, which met in Worcester, Massachusetts, in 1851.

When  their  letter  was  read  to  the  Convention,  Ernestine  Potowsky  Rose
(1810–1892) offered the following response, which indicated the different per-
spective and political strategy of the American women’s movement.

Pauline Roland and Jeanne Deroine
Letter to the Convention of the
Women of America

Dear Sisters: Your courageous declaration of Woman’s
Rights has resounded even to our prison and has filled
our souls with inexpressible joy. In France the [conserva-
tive] reaction [to the uprising of 1848] has suppressed
the cry of liberty of the women of the future. . . . The
Assembly kept silence in regard to the right of one half
of humanity. . . . No mention was made of the right of
woman in a Constitution framed in the name of Liberty,
Equality, and Fraternity. . . .

[However,] the right of woman has been recognized
by the laborers and they have consecrated that right by
the election of those who had claimed it in vain for both
sexes. . . . It is by labor; it is by entering resolutely into the
ranks of the working people that women will conquer the
civil and political equality on which depends the happiness
of the world. . . . Sisters of America! your socialist sisters of
France are united with you in the vindication of the right
of woman to civil and political equality. . . . [Only] by the
union of the working classes of both sexes [can we
achieve] . . . the civil and political equality of woman.

Ernestine Rose
Speech to the Second Woman’s Rights
Convention

After having heard the letter read from our poor incarcer-
ated sisters of France, well might we exclaim, Alas poor
France! Where is thy glory?

. . . But need we wonder that France, governed as
she is by Russian and Austrian despotism, does not rec-
ognize . . . the Rights of Woman, when even here, in this
far-famed land of freedom . . . woman, the mockingly
so-called “better half ” of man, has yet to plead for her
rights. . . . In the laws of the land, she has no rights; in
government she has no voice. . . . From the cradle to the
grave she is subject to the power and control of man.
Father, guardian, or husband, one conveys her like some
piece of merchandise over to the other.

. . . Carry out the republican principle of universal
suffrage, or strike it from your banners and substitute
“Freedom and Power to one half of society, and Sub-
mission and Slavery to the other.” Give women the
elective franchise. Let married women have the same
right to property that their husbands have. . . .

There is no reason against woman’s elevation, but . . .

prejudices. The main cause is a pernicious falsehood
propagated against her being, namely that she is inferior
by her nature. Inferior in what? What has man ever done
that woman, under the same advantages could not do?

Source: History of Woman Suffrage, ed. Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Susan B. Anthony, and
Matilda Joslyn Gage (New York: Fowler & Wells, 1887), 1: 234–242.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  What strategy to achieve women’s rights do Roland and
Deroine advocate? What strategy can be detected in
Rose’s remarks? How are their perspectives similar to, or
different from, one another?

2.  What does this French-American comparison (and your
reading in Chapter 11) suggest about the nature and
values of the American women’s rights movement?

proclaimed,  suffrage  was  “the  corner-stone  of  this
enterprise, since we do not seek to protect woman, but
rather to place her in a position to protect herself.”

The activists’ legislative campaign required talented
organizers and lobbyists. The most prominent political

operative  was  Susan  B.  Anthony  (1820–1906),  a
Quaker  who  had  acquired  political  skills  in  the  tem-
perance  and  antislavery  movements.  Those  experi-
ences,  Anthony  reflected,  taught  her  “the  great  evil
of  woman’s  utter  dependence  on  man.”  Joining  the

372

