CHAPTER 11

  CHAPTER REVIEW

373

women’s  rights  movement,  she  worked  closely  with
Elizabeth  Cady  Stanton.  Anthony  created  an  activist
network of political “captains,” all women, who relent-
lessly  lobbied  state  legislatures.  In  1860,  her  efforts
secured a New York law granting women the right to
control  their  own  wages  (which  fathers  or  husbands
had previously managed); to own property acquired by
“trade, business, labors, or services”; and, if widowed,
to assume sole guardianship of their children. Genuine
individualism for women, the dream of transcenden-
talist Margaret Fuller, had advanced a tiny step closer
to reality. In such small and much larger ways, the mid-
century reform  movements  had  altered  the  character
of American culture.

SUMMARY
In this chapter, we examined four major cultural move-
ments  of  the  mid-nineteenth  century — transcenden-
talist
reform,  communalism,  abolitionism,  and
women’s rights — as well as the new popular culture in
New York City. Our discussion of the transcendental-
ists highlighted the influence of Ralph Waldo Emerson

on the great literary figures of the era and linked tran-
scendentalism  to  the  rise  of  individualism  and  the
character of middle-class American culture.

Our  analysis  of  communal  experiments  probed
their  members’  efforts  to  devise  new  rules  for  sexual
behavior,  gender  relationships,  and  property  owner-
ship. We saw that successful communal experiments,
such as Mormonism, required a charismatic leader or a
religious  foundation  and  endured  if  they  developed
strong, even authoritarian, institutions.

We also traced the personal and ideological factors
that linked the abolitionist and women’s rights move-
ments. Lucretia Mott, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and the
Grimké  sisters  began  as  antislavery  advocates,  but,
denied access to lecture platforms by male abolitionists
and  conservative  clergy,  they  became  staunch  advo-
cates  of  women’s  rights.  This  transition  was  a  logical
one:  both  enslaved  blacks  and  married  women  were
“owned”  by  men,  either  as  property  or  as  their  legal
dependents.  Consequently,  the  efforts  to  abolish  the
legal prerogatives of husbands were as controversial as
those to end the legal property rights of slave owners.
As  reformers  took  aim  at  such  deeply  rooted  institu-
tions and customs, many Americans feared that their
activism would not perfect society but destroy it.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

individualism (p. 346)
American Renaissance (p. 346)
transcendentalism (p. 346)
utopias (p. 349)
socialism (p. 351)
perfectionism (p. 352)
Mormonism (p. 352)
minstrelsy (p. 356)
abolitionism (p. 357)

Underground Railroad (p. 362)
amalgamation (p. 364)
gag rule (p. 365)
separate sphere (p. 367)
domestic slavery (p. 370)
married women’s property laws

(p. 371)

Seneca Falls Convention (p. 371)

Key People

Ralph Waldo Emerson (p. 346)
Henry David Thoreau (p. 347)
Margaret Fuller (p. 347)
Walt Whitman (p. 348)
Herman Melville (p. 349)
Nat Turner (p. 360)
William Lloyd Garrison (p. 362)
Dorothea Dix (p. 367)
Elizabeth Cady Stanton (p. 371)
Susan B. Anthony (p. 371)

