374

PART 4

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  Analyze  the  relationship  between  religion  and
reform in the decades from 1800 to 1860. Why did
many  religious  people  feel  compelled  to  remake
society? How successful were they? Do you see any
parallels with social movements today?

2.  The  word  reform  has  a  positive  connotation,  as
an  effort  to  make  things  better.  Yet  many  mid-
nineteenth-century  Americans  viewed
some
“reforms,” such as abolitionism and women’s rights,
as  destructive  to  the  social  order,  and  other
“reforms,” such as Sabbatarianism and temperance,
as  threats  to  individual  freedom.  What  was  the
apparent conflict among reform, social order, and
liberty?

3.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events listed under “Ideas, Beliefs, and Culture” on
the thematic timeline on page 283, paying particu-
lar attention to the entries related to individualism
and rights on the one hand and to various commu-
nal  and  religious  movements  on  the  other.  What
was the relationship between these somewhat con-
tradictory cultural impulses? How were these two
movements  related  to  the  social  and  economic
changes in America in the decades after 1800?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  Did  the  era  of
reform  (1820–1860)  increase  or  diminish  the
extent  of  social  and  cultural  freedom  that  existed
during the Revolutionary era (1770–1820)?

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  Compare  the  cheerful
depiction  of  the  young  woman  in  the  watercolor
depicting “night life in Philadelphia” on page 355

with  the  thoughtful  or  intense  expression  on  the
faces of the social reformers depicted in this chap-
ter  (Emerson,  p.  346;  Fuller,  p.  348;  and  Stanton
and  Anthony,  p.  371).  Given  their  beliefs,  would
those  reformers  have  approved  or  disapproved  of
the  conduct  of  the  young  Philadelphia  woman?
Explain your reasoning.

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Patricia Cline Cohen, The Murder of Helen Jewett: The
Life and Death of a Prostitute in New York City (1998).
A gripping murder mystery that probes the nature of
the new plebeian culture.

Stephen B. Oates, The Fires of Jubilee (1975). Explores
the life and rebellion of Nat Turner.

Mark Perry, Lift Up Thy Voice (2001). Offers a study of
the Grimké family.

Daniel Walker Howe, What Hath God Wrought: The
Transformation of America, 1815–1848 (2007). A
comprehensive history from a cultural perspective.

Paul E. Johnson and Sean Wilentz, The Kingdom of
Matthias (1995). A compelling story of religious
utopianism gone mad.

David Roediger, The Wages of Whiteness (1995).
Shows how racism shaped white working-class
culture.

