The South Expands:
Slavery and Society
1800–1860

Life  in  South  Carolina  had  been

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
How  did  the  creation  of  a  cotton-
based economy change the lives of
whites  and  blacks  in  all  regions  of
the South?

good to James Lide. A slave-owning
planter along the Pee Dee River, Lide
and  his  wife  raised  twelve  children  and
long  resisted  the  “Alabama  Fever”  that
prompted thousands of Carolinians to move
west. Finally, at age sixty-ﬁve, probably seeking land for his many offspring, he moved
his  slaves  and  family — including  six  children  and  six  grandchildren — to  a  plantation
near Montgomery, Alabama. There, the family lived initially in a squalid log cabin with
air  holes  but  no  windows.  Even  after  building  a  new  house,  the  Lides’  life  remained
unsettled.  “Pa  is  quite  in  the  notion  of  moving  somewhere,”  his  daughter  Maria
reported.  Although  James  Lide  died  in  Alabama,  many  of  his  children  moved  on.  In
1854, at the age of ﬁfty-eight, Eli Lide migrated to Texas, telling his father, “Something
within me whispers onward and onward.”

The Lides’ story was that of southern society. Between 1800 and 1860, white plant-
ers moved west and, using the muscles and sweat of a million enslaved African Ameri-
cans, brought millions of acres into cultivation. By 1840, the South was at the cutting
edge  of  the  American  Market  Revolution  (Figure  12.1).  It  annually  produced  and
exported 1.5 million bales of raw cotton — over two-thirds of the world’s supply — and
its economy was larger and richer than that of most nations. “Cotton is King,” boasted
the Southern Cultivator.

No  matter  how  rich  they  were,  few  cotton  planters  in  Alabama,  Mississippi,  and
Texas lived  in  elegant houses or led cultured lives. They had forsaken the aristocratic
gentility of the Chesapeake and the Carolinas to make money. “To sell cotton in order
to  buy  negroes — to  make  more  cotton  to  buy  more  negroes,  ‘ad  inﬁnitum,’  is  the
aim . . . of the thorough-going cotton planter,” a traveler reported from Mississippi in
1835. “His whole soul is wrapped up in the pursuit.” Plantation women lamented the
loss of genteel surroundings and polite society. Raised in North Carolina, where she was
“blest with every comfort, & even luxury,” Mary Drake found Mississippi and Alabama
“a dreary waste.”

Enslaved African Americans knew what “dreary waste” really meant: unremitting
toil, unrelieved poverty, and profound sadness. Sold south from Maryland, where his
family  had  lived  for  generations,  Charles  Ball’s  father  became  “gloomy  and  morose”
and  ran  off  and  disappeared.  With  good  reason:  on  new  cotton  plantations,  slaves
labored from “sunup to sundown” and from one end of the year to the other, forced to
work by the threat of the lash. Always wanting more, southern planters and politicians
plotted to extend their plantation economy across the continent.

12

C H A P T E R

THE DOMESTIC
SLAVE TRADE

The Upper South Exports Slaves

The Impact on Blacks

THE WORLD OF
SOUTHERN WHITES
The Dual Cultures of the

Planter Elite

Planters, Smallholding Yeomen,

and Tenants

EXPANDING AND
GOVERNING THE SOUTH

The Settlement of Texas

The Politics of Democracy

THE AFRICAN
AMERICAN WORLD

Evangelical Black Protestantism

Forging Families and
Communities

Negotiating Rights

The Free Black Population

376

