380

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors drove the
expansion of the domestic
slave trade, and how did it
work?

was growing rapidly from natural increase — an aver-
age of 27 percent a decade by the 1810s — and creating
a surplus of enslaved workers on many plantations. The
result was a growing domestic trade in slaves. Between
1818 and 1829, planters in just one Maryland tobacco-
growing county — Frederick — sold at least 952 slaves
to  traders  or  cotton  planters.  Plantation  owners  in
Virginia disposed of 75,000 slaves
during  the  1810s  and  again  dur-
ing  the  1820s.  The  number  of
forced Virginia migrants jumped
to  nearly  120,000  during  the
1830s  and  then  averaged  85,000
during  the  1840s  and  1850s.  In
Virginia  alone,  then,  slave  owners  ripped  440,000
African  Americans  from  communities  where  their
families  had  lived  for  three  or  four  generations.  By
1860, the “mania for buying negroes” from the Upper
South  had  resulted  in  a  massive  transplantation  of
more than 1 million slaves (Figure 12.2). A majority of
African Americans now lived and worked in the Deep
South, the lands that stretched from Georgia to Texas.
This African American migration took two forms:
transfer and sale. Looking for new opportunities, thou-
sands of Chesapeake and Carolina planters — men like
James Lide — sold their existing plantations and moved
their slaves to the Southwest. Many other planters gave
slaves  to  sons  and  daughters  who  moved  west.  Such
transfers accounted for about 40 percent of the African
American migrants. The rest — about 60 percent of the
1 million migrants — were “sold south” through traders.
Just  as  the  Atlantic  slave  trade  enriched  English
merchants in the eighteenth century, so the domestic

market  brought  wealth  to  American  traders  between
1800  and  1860.  One  set  of  routes ran  to  the  Atlantic
coast and sent thousands of slaves to sugar plantations
in Louisiana, the former French territory that entered
the Union in 1812. As sugar output soared, slave trad-
ers  scoured  the  countryside  near  the  port  cities  of
Baltimore,  Alexandria,  Richmond,  and  Charleston —
searching, as one of them put it, for “likely young men
such  as  I  think  would  suit  the  New  Orleans  market.”
Each year, hundreds of muscular young slaves passed
through auction houses in the port cities bound for the
massive  trade  mart  in  New  Orleans.  Because  this
coastal trade in laborers was highly visible, it elicited
widespread condemnation by northern abolitionists.

Sugar  was  a  “killer”  crop,  and  Louisiana  (like  the
eighteenth-century  West  Indies)  soon  had  a  well-
deserved  reputation  among  African  Americans  “as  a
place of slaughter.” Hundreds died each year from dis-
ease, overwork, and brutal treatment. Maryland farmer
John  Anthony  Munnikhuysen  refused  to  allow  his
daughter Priscilla to marry a Louisiana sugar planter,
declaring:  “Mit  has  never  been  used  to  see  negroes
flayed alive and it would kill her.”

The  inland  system  that  fed  slaves  to  the  Cotton
South was less visible than the coastal trade but more
extensive.  Professional  slave  traders  went  from  one
rural  village  to  another  buying  “young  and  likely
Negroes.”  The  traders  marched  their  purchases  in
coffles — columns of slaves bound to one another — to
Alabama, Mississippi, and Missouri in the 1830s and to
Arkansas and Texas in the 1850s. One slave described
the arduous journey: “Dem Speckulators would put the
chilluns  in  a  wagon  usually  pulled  by  oxens  and  de

Slaves displaced each decade

Cumulative shift southward

Total, 1790–1860
1,000,500

1 million

0.75

0.5

0.25

145,000

120,000

267,500

179,000 231,500

20,500

37,000

1790s

1800s

1810s

1820s

1830s

1840s

1850s

FIGURE 12.2
Forced Slave Migration to the Lower
South, 1790–1860

The cotton boom set in motion a vast
redistribution of the African American
population. Between 1790 and 1860,
white planters moved or sold more than
a million enslaved people from the Upper
to the Lower South, a process that broke
up families and long-established black
communities. Based on data in Robert William Fogel
and Stanley L. Engerman, Time on the Cross: The
Economics of American Negro Slavery, by Robert W.
Fogel and Stanley L. Engerman. Copyright © 1974 Little
Brown and in Speculators and Slaves: Masters, Traders,
and Slaves in the Old South, by Michael Tadman,
University of Wisconsin Press, 1996.

