CHAPTER 12

  The South Expands: Slavery and Society, 1800–1860

381

The Inland Slave Trade

Mounted whites escort a convoy of slaves
from Virginia to Tennessee in Lewis Miller’s
Slave Trader, Sold to Tennessee (1853).
For white planters, the interstate trade in
slaves was lucrative; it pumped money into
the declining Chesapeake economy and
provided young workers for the expanding
plantations of the cotton belt. For blacks,
it was a traumatic journey, a new Middle
Passage that broke up their families and
communities. “Arise! Arise! and weep no
more, dry up your tears, we shall part no
more,” the slaves sing sorrowfully as they
journey to new lives in Tennessee. Abby
Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Museum,
Williamsburg, VA.

older folks was chained or tied together sos dey could
not run off.” Once a coffle reached its destination, the
trader would sell slaves “at every village in the county.”
Chesapeake  and  Carolina  planters  provided  the
human  cargo.  Some  planters  sold  slaves  when  poor
management or their “own extravagances” threw them
into debt. “Trouble gathers thicker and thicker around
me,” Thomas B. Chaplin of South Carolina lamented in
his diary. “I will be compelled to send about ten prime
Negroes to Town on next Monday, to be sold.” Many
more  planters  doubled  as  slave  traders,  earning  sub-
stantial profits by traveling south to sell some of their
slaves and those of their neighbors. Thomas Weatherly
of South Carolina drove his surplus slaves to Hayneville,
Alabama,  where  he  “sold  ten  negroes.”  Colonel  E.  S.
Irvine, a member of the South Carolina legislature and
“a  highly  respected  gentleman”  in  white  circles,  like-
wise  traveled  frequently  “to  sell  a  drove  of  Negroes.”
Prices marched in step with those for cotton; during a
boom  year  in  the  1850s,  a  planter  noted  that  a  slave
“will fetch $1000, cash, quick.”

The  domestic  slave  trade  was  crucial  to  the  pros-
perity of the migrating white planters because it pro-
vided workers to fell the forests and plant cotton in the
Gulf states. Equally important, it sustained the wealth
of slave owners in the Upper South. By selling surplus
black workers, tobacco, rice, and grain producers in the
Chesapeake and Carolinas added about 20 percent to
their income. As a Maryland newspaper remarked in
1858,  “[The  trade  serves  as]  an  almost  universal
resource to raise money. A prime able-bodied slave is
worth  three  times  as  much  to  the  cotton  or  sugar
planter as to the Maryland agriculturalist.”

The Impact on Blacks
For  African  American  families,  the  domestic  slave
trade  was  a  personal  disaster  that  underlined  their
status — and  vulnerability — as  chattel  slaves.  In  law,
they were the movable personal property of the whites
who owned them. As Lewis Clark, a fugitive from slav-
ery, noted: “Many a time i’ve had ’em say to me, ‘You’re
my  property.’ ”  “The  being  of  slavery,  its  soul  and  its
body, lives and moves in the chattel principle, the prop-
erty principle, the bill of sale principle,” declared for-
mer slave James W. C. Pennington. As a South Carolina
master  put  it,  “[The  slave’s  earnings]  belong  to  me
because I bought him.”

Slave  property  underpinned  the  entire  southern
economic  system.  Whig  politician  Henry  Clay  noted
that the “immense amount of capital which is invested
in slave property . . . is owned by widows and orphans,
by the aged and infirm, as well as the sound and vigor-
ous. It  is the subject of mortgages, deeds of trust, and
family settlements.” Clay concluded: “I know that there
is  a  visionary  dogma,  which  holds  that  negro  slaves
cannot be the subject of property [but] . . . that is prop-
erty which the law declares to be property.”

As  a  slave  owner,  Clay  also  knew  that  property
rights were key to slave discipline. “I govern them . . .
without the whip,” another master explained, “by stat-
ing . . . that I should sell them if they do not conduct
themselves  as  I  wish.”  The  threat  was  effective.  “The
Negroes here dread nothing on earth so much as this,”
a  Maryland  observer  noted.  “They  regard  the  south
with perfect horror, and to be sent there is considered
as the worst punishment.” Thousands of slaves suffered

