382

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Slave Auction Notice

This public notice for a slave auction to be held in Iberville,
Louisiana, advertises “24 Head of Slaves” as if they were
cattle — a striking commentary on the “chattel principle”
and business of slavery. Library of Congress.

that  fate,  which  destroyed  about  one  in  every  four
slave marriages. “Why does the slave ever love?” asked
black abolitionist Harriet Jacobs in her autobiography,
Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, when her partner
“may at any moment be wrenched away by the hand
of  violence?”  After  being  sold,  one  Georgia  slave
lamented, “My Dear wife for you and my Children my
pen cannot Express the griffe I feel to be parted from
you all.”

The  interstate  slave  trade  often  focused  on  young
adults.  In  northern  Maryland,  planters  sold  away
boys  and  girls  at  an  average  age  of  seventeen  years.
“Dey  sole  my  sister  Kate,”  Anna  Harris  remembered
decades later, “and I ain’t seed or
heard of her since.” The trade also
separated  almost  a  third  of  all
slave  children  under  the  age  of
fourteen from one or both of their
parents. Sarah Grant remembered,

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What were the effects of
the slave trade on black
families?

“Mamma used to cry when she had to go back to work
because she was always scared some of us kids would
be sold while she was away.” Well might she worry, for
slave  traders  worked  quickly.  “One  night  I  lay  down
on  de  straw  mattress  wid  my  mammy,”  Vinny  Baker
recalled,  “an’  de  nex’  mo’nin  I  woke  up  an’  she  wuz
gone.”  When  their  owner  sold  seven-year-old  Laura
Clark and ten other children from their plantation in
North  Carolina,  Clark  sensed  that  she  would  see  her
mother “no mo’ in dis life.”

Despite  these  sales,  75  percent  of  slave  marriages
remained unbroken, and the majority of children lived
with one or both parents until puberty. Consequently,
the sense of family among African Americans remained
strong. Sold from Virginia to Texas in 1843, Hawkins
Wilson carried with him a mental picture of his family.
Twenty-five  years  later  and  now  a  freedman,  Wilson
set out to find his “dearest relatives” in Virginia. “My
sister belonged to Peter Coleman in Caroline County
and  her  name  was  Jane. . . . She  had  three  children,
Robert, Charles and Julia, when I left — Sister Martha
belonged to Dr. Jefferson. . . . Sister Matilda belonged
to Mrs. Botts.”

During  the  decades  between  sale  and  freedom,
Hawkins  Wilson  and  thousands  of  other  African
Americans constructed new lives for themselves in the
Mississippi  Valley.  Undoubtedly,  many  did  so  with  a
sense  of  foreboding,  knowing  from  personal  experi-
ence that their owners could disrupt their lives at any
moment. Like Charles Ball, some “longed to die, and
escape  from  the  bonds  of  my  tormentors.” The  dark-
ness  of  slavery  shadowed  even  moments  of  joy.
Knowing  that  sales  often  ended  slave  marriages,  a
white minister blessed one couple “for so long as God
keeps them together.”

Many  white  planters  “saw”  only  the  African
American  marriages  that  endured  and  ignored  those
they  had  broken.  Accordingly,  many  owners  consid-
ered  themselves  benevolent  masters,  committed  to
the  welfare  of  “my  family,  black  and  white.”  Some
masters  gave  substance  to  this  paternalist  ideal  by
treating kindly “loyal and worthy” slaves — black over-
seers,  the  mammy  who  raised  their  children,  and
trusted  house  servants.  By  preserving  the  families  of
these  slaves,  many  planters  could  believe  that  they
“sold  south”  only  “coarse”  troublemakers  and  uncivi-
lized slaves who had “little sense of family.” Other own-
ers  were  more  honest  about  the  human  cost  of  their
pursuit of wealth. “Tomorrow the negroes are to get off
[to  Kentucky],”  a  slave-owning  woman  in  Virginia
wrote  to  a  friend,  “and  I  expect  there  will  be  great
crying  and  moaning,  with  children  Leaving  there

