CHAPTER 12

  The South Expands: Slavery and Society, 1800–1860

383

mothers,  mothers  there  children,  and  women  there
husbands.”

Whether or not they acknowledged the slaves’ pain,
few  southern  whites  questioned  the  morality  of  the
slave trade. Responding to abolitionists’ criticism, the
city  council  of  Charleston,  South  Carolina,  declared
that  “the  removal  of  slaves  from  place  to  place,  and
their transfer from master to master, by gift, purchase,
or  otherwise”  was  completely  consistent  “with  moral
principle  and  with  the  highest  order  of  civilization”
(American Voices, p. 384).

hundred slaves and huge tracts of the most fertile lands.
Their ranks included many of the richest families in the
United  States.  On  the  eve  of  the  Civil  War,  southern
slave  owners  accounted  for  nearly  two-thirds  of  all
American men with wealth of $100,000 or more. Other
white southerners — backcountry yeomen farmers and
cotton-planting tenants in particular — occupied some
of  the  lowest  rungs  of  the  nation’s  social  order.  The
expansion  of  southern  slavery,  like  the  flowering  of
northern  capitalism,  increased  inequalities  of  wealth
and status.

To see a longer excerpt of the city council of
Charleston, South Carolina, document, along with
other primary sources from this period, see Sources
for America’s History.

The World of Southern Whites
American slavery took root in the early eighteenth cen-
tury on the tobacco plantations of the Chesapeake and
in the rice fields of the Carolina low country. However,
it  grew  to  maturity  during  the  first  half  of  the  nine-
teenth century on the cotton fields and sugar planta-
tions of the Mississippi Valley. By then, a small elite of
extraordinarily  wealthy  planter  families  stood  at  the
top  of  southern  society.  These  families — about  three
thousand  in  number — each  owned  more  than  one

The Dual Cultures of the Planter Elite
The westward movement split the plantation elite into
two  distinct  groups:  the  traditional  aristocrats  of  the
Old  South,  whose  families  had  gained  their  wealth
from  tobacco  and  rice,  and  the  upstart  capitalist-
inclined planters of the cotton states.

The Traditional  Southern  Gentry  The  Old  South
gentry dominated the Tidewater region of the Chesa-
peake  and  the  low  country  of  South  Carolina  and
Georgia. During the eighteenth century, these planters
built  impressive  mansions  and  adopted  the  manners
and  values  of  the  English  landed  gentry  (Chapter  3).
Their  aristocratic-oriented  culture  survived  the  Rev-
olution  of  1776  and  soon  took  on  a  republican  glaze

Redcliffe Plantation

In 1857, James Henry Hammond
began construction of this house
on a 400-acre site in Aiken County,
South Carolina. It originally had a
double-decked porch in the Greek
Revival style, which gave it an even
more imposing presence. Fifty
enslaved African Americans
worked at Redcliffe, and nearly
three hundred more on Hammond’s
other properties, providing the
wealth that allowed his family to
live in comfort. Hammond lived at
Redcliffe until he died in 1864 at
the age of ﬁfty-seven, his health
undermined by his struggles with
Confederate leaders over wartime
policies and by mercury poisoning
from the laxatives he had taken for
nearly forty years. Michael A. Stroud.

