A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

The Debate over Free

and Slave Labor

As the abolitionist assault  on slavery mounted,  its rhetoric shaped  the  debate
over the emergent system of wage labor in the northern states. By the 1850s,
New York senator William Seward starkly contrasted the political systems of the
South  and  the  North  in  terms  of  their  labor  systems:  “the  one  resting  on  the
basis of servile or slave labor, the other on voluntary labor of freemen.” Seward
strongly favored the “free-labor system,” crediting to it “the strength, wealth,
greatness,  intelligence,  and  freedom,  which  the  whole  American  people  now
enjoy.” As the following documents show, some Americans agreed with Seward,
while others, such as New York Tribune editor Horace Greeley and South Caro-
lina  senator  James  Henry  Hammond  (who  is  quoted  often  in  this  chapter  and
whose house appears on page 383), contested his premises and conclusions.

South Carolina Senator James Henry Hammond
Speech to the Senate, March 4, 1858

New York Protestant Episcopal Church Mission Society
Sixth Annual Report, 1837

In response to New York senator Seward, Senator Hammond
urged admission of Kansas under the proslavery Lecompton
Constitution and, by way of argument, celebrated the suc-
cess  of  the  South’s  cotton  economy  and  its  political  and
social institutions.

In all social systems there must be a class to do the
menial duties, to perform the drudgery of life. . . . Such
a class you must have, or you would not have that other
class which leads progress, civilization, and refinement.
It constitutes the very mud-sill of society and of political
government. . . . Fortunately for the South, she found a
race adapted to that purpose to her hand. A race inferior
to her own, but eminently qualified in temper, in vigor, in
docility, in capacity to stand the climate, to answer all her
purposes. We use them for our purpose, and call them
slaves. . . .

The Senator from New York said yesterday that the
whole world had abolished slavery. Aye, the name, but
not the thing; . . . for the man who lives by daily labor,
and scarcely lives at that, and who has to put out his
labor in the market, and take the best he can get for it;
in short, your whole hireling class of manual laborers
and “operatives,” as you call them, are essentially slaves.
The difference between us is, that our slaves are hired for
life and well compensated; there is no starvation, no beg-
ging, no want of employment among our people, and not
too much employment either. Yours are hired by the day,
not cared for, and scantily compensated, which may be
proved in the most painful manner, at any hour in any
street in any of your large towns.

Source: The Congressional Globe (Washington, DC, March 6, 1858), 962.

This excerpt demonstrates the society’s belief that a class-
bound  social  order  could  be  avoided  by  encouraging  “a
spirit  of  independence  and  self-estimation”  among  the
poor.

In the older countries of Europe, there is a CLASS OF
POOR: families born to poverty, living in poverty, dying
in poverty. With us there are none such. In our bounteous
land individuals alone are poor; but they form no poor
class, because with them poverty is but a transient evil . . .
save [except] paupers and vagabonds . . . all else form one
common class of citizens; some more, others less advanced
in the career of honorable independence.

Source: New York Protestant Episcopal Church Mission Society, Sixth Annual Report
(New York, 1837), 15–16.

Horace Greeley
Public Letter Declining an Invitation to
Attend an Antislavery Convention in
Cincinnati, Ohio, June 3, 1845

This  letter  from  the  editor  of  the  New  York  Tribune
explains his broad deﬁnition of slavery.

Dear Sir: — I received, weeks since, your letter inviting
me to be present at a general convention of opponents
of Human Slavery. . . . What is Slavery? You will probably
answer; “The legal subjection of one human being to the
will and power of another.” But this definition appears to
me inaccurate. . . .

I understand by Slavery, that condition in which one

human being exists mainly as a convenience for other
human beings. . . . In short, . . . where the relation [is

384

