one] of authority, social ascendency and power over sub-
sistence on the one hand, and of necessity, servility, and
degradation on the other — there, in my view, is Slavery. . . .
If I am less troubled concerning the Slavery prevalent in
Charleston or New-Orleans, it is because I see so much
Slavery in New-York. . . .

Wherever Opportunity to Labor is obtained with dif-
ficulty, and is so deficient that the Employing class may
virtually prescribe their own terms and pay the Laborer
only such share as they choose of the produce, there is a
strong tendency to Slavery.

Source: Horace Greeley, Hints Toward Reform in Lectures, Addresses, and Other Writings
(New York: Harper & Brothers, 1850), 352–355.

Editorial in the Staunton Spectator, 1859

Entitled “Freedom and Slavery,” this editorial argues that
“the black man’s lot as a slave, is vastly preferable to that
of his free brethren at the North.”

The intelligent, christian slave-holder at the South is the
best friend of the negro. He does not regard his bonds-
men as mere chattel property, but as human beings to
whom he owes duties. While the Northern Pharisee will
not permit a negro to ride on the city railroads, Southern
gentlemen and ladies are seen every day, side by side, in
cars and coaches, with their faithful servants. Here the
honest black man is not only protected by the laws and
public sentiment, but he is respected by the community
as truly as if his skin were white. Here there are ties of
genuine friendship and affection between whites and
blacks, leading to an interchange of all the comities of
life. The slave nurses his master in sickness, and sheds
tears of genuine sorrow at his grave.

Source: Staunton Spectator, December 6, 1859, p. 2, c. 1.

James Henry Hammond
Private Letter to His Son Harry Hammond,
1856

This letter regards the future of Hammond’s slave mistress,
Sally  Johnson,  her  son  Henderson,  and  her  daughter
Louisa, who was the common mistress of father and son,
and Louisa’s children whom they sired.

In the last will I made I left to you . . . Sally Johnson the
mother of Louisa & all the children of both. Sally says
Henderson is my child. It is possible, but I do not believe
it Yet act on her’s rather than my opinion. Louisa’s first
child may be mine. I think not. Her second I believe is
mine. Take care of her & her children who are both of
your blood if not of mine. . . . The services of the rest will
compensate for indulgence to these. I cannot free these
people & send them North. It would be cruelty to them.
Nor would I like that any but my own blood should own
as slaves my own blood or Louisa. I leave them to your
charge, believing that you will best appreciate & most
independently carry out my wishes in regard to them. Do
not let Louisa or any of my children or possible children
be the Slaves of Strangers. Slavery in the family will be
their happiest earthly condition.

Source: James Hammond to Harry Hammond, February 19, 1856, in JHH Papers, SCL,
quoted in Drew Gilpin Faust, James Henry Hammond and the Old South: A Design for
Mastery (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1982), 87.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Which of these documents argue for slave owners as

benevolent paternalists and the institution of slavery as
a “positive good”? What other points of view are repre-
sented?

2.  Given the discussion of “class” and “honorable indepen-
dence” in the Mission Society statement, how would an
Episcopalian reply to Hammond’s critique of the north-
ern labor system?

3.  How can we understand Hammond’s treatment of Sally
Johnson and her daughter, as well as his refusal to free
his and his son’s children, in the context of his 1858
speech and the Staunton Spectator’s editorial?

4.  Using the principles asserted in his letter, how would
Horace Greeley analyze the southern labor system, as
described by Hammond and the Staunton Spectator?
Why does Greeley suggest that the northern system has
only “a strong tendency to Slavery”?

5.  Consider the sources above in the light of this Abraham
Lincoln comment: “although volume upon volume is
written to prove slavery a very good thing, we never
hear of the man who wishes to take the good of it, by
being a slave himself.”

385

