386

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

(Chapter  8).  Classical  republican  theory,  which  had
long identified political tyranny as the major threat to
liberty,  had  its  roots  in  the  societies  of  Greece  and
Rome, where slavery was part of the natural order of
society.  That  variety  of  republicanism  appealed  to
wealthy  southerners,  who  feared  federal  government
interference  with  their  slave  property.  On  the  state
level, planters worried about populist politicians who
would mobilize poorer whites, and so they demanded
that authority rest in the hands of incorruptible men of
“virtue.”

Indeed, affluent planters cast themselves as a repub-
lican  aristocracy.  “The  planters  here  are  essentially
what  the  nobility  are  in  other  countries,”  declared
James  Henry  Hammond  of  South  Carolina.  “They
stand at the head of society & politics . . . [and form]
an  aristocracy  of  talents,  of  virtue,  of  generosity  and
courage.”  Wealthy  planters  criticized  the  democratic
polity and middle-class society that was developing in
the Northeast and Midwest. “Inequality is the funda-
mental  law  of  the  universe,”  declared  one  planter.
Others condemned professional politicians as “a set of
demagogues” and questioned the legitimacy of univer-
sal  suffrage.  “Times  are  sadly  different  now  to  what
they were when I was a boy,” lamented David Gavin, a
prosperous  South  Carolinian.  Then,  the  “Sovereign
people, alias mob” had little influence; now they vied
for power with the elite. “[How can] I rejoice for a free-
dom,” Gavin thundered, “which allows every bankrupt,
swindler, thief, and scoundrel, traitor and seller of his
vote to be placed on an equality with myself ?”

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
Between 1800 and 1860,
what changes occurred
in the South’s planta-
tion crops, labor system,
defense of slavery, and
elite planter lifestyle?

To  maintain  their  privileged  identity,  aristocratic
planters  married  their  sons  and  daughters  to  one
another  and  expected  them  to  follow  in  their  foot-
steps — the men working as plant-
ers,  merchants,  lawyers,  news-
paper  editors,  and  ministers  and
the  women  hosting  plantation
balls and church bazaars. To con-
firm  their  social  preeminence,
they lived extravagantly and enter-
tained  graciously.  James  Henry
Hammond  built  a  Greek  Revival
mansion with a center hall 53 feet
by  20  feet,  its  floor  embellished  with  stylish  Belgian
tiles  and  expensive  Brussels  carpets.  “Once  a  year,
like  a  great  feudal  landlord,”  Hammond’s  neighbor
recounted, “[he] gave a fete or grand dinner to all the
country people.”

Rice planters remained at the apex of the plantation
aristocracy. In 1860, the fifteen proprietors of the vast
plantations  in  All  Saints  Parish  in  South  Carolina

owned 4,383 slaves — nearly 300 apiece — who annu-
ally grew and processed 14 million pounds of rice. As
inexpensive  Asian  rice  entered  the  world  market  in
the 1820s and cut their profits, the Carolina rice aristo-
crats  sold  some  slaves  and  worked  the  others  harder,
sustaining  their  luxurious  lifestyle.  The  “hospitality
and elegance” of Charleston and Savan nah impressed
savvy  English
John  Silk  Buckingham.
Buckingham likewise found “polished” families among
long-established  French  Catholic  planters  in  New
Orleans  and  along  the  Mississippi  River:  There,  the
“sugar and cotton planters live in splendid edifices, and
enjoy all the luxury that wealth can impart” (America
Compared, p. 387).

traveler

In tobacco-growing regions, the lives of the planter
aristocracy  followed  a  different  trajectory,  in  part
because  slave  ownership  was  widely  diffused.  In  the
1770s, about 60 percent of white families in the Chesa-
peake region owned at least one African American. As
wealthy tobacco planters moved their estates and slaves
to  the  Cotton  South,  middling  whites  (who  owned
between five and twenty slaves) came to dominate the
Chesapeake  economy.  The  descendants  of  the  old
tobacco aristocracy remained influential, but increas-
ingly  as  slave-owning  grain  farmers,  lawyers,  mer-
chants,  industrialists,  and  politicians.  They  hired  out
surplus  slaves,  sold  them  south,  or  allowed  them  to
purchase their freedom.

The Ideology and Reality of “Benevolence”  The
planter aristocracy flourished around the periphery of
the South’s booming Cotton Belt — in Virginia, South
Carolina,  and  Louisiana — but  it  took  the  lead  in
defending  slavery.  Ignoring  the  Jeffersonian  response
to  slavery  as  a  “misfortune”  or  a  “necessary  evil”
(Chapter  8),  southern  apologists  in  the  1830s  argued
that  the  institution  was  a  “positive  good”  because  it
subsidized an elegant lifestyle for a white elite and pro-
vided  tutelage  for  genetically  inferior  Africans.  “As  a
race, the African is inferior to the white man,” declared
Alexander  Stephens,  the  future  vice  president  of  the
Confederacy. “Subordination to the white man, is his
normal  condition.”  Apologists  depicted  planters  and
their  wives  as  aristocratic  models  of  “disinterested
benevolence,” who provided food and housing for their
workers  and  cared  for  them  in  old  age.  One  wealthy
Georgian declared, “Plantation government should be
eminently  patriarchal. . . . The  pater-familias,  or  head
of the family, should, in one sense, be the father of the
whole concern, negroes and all.”

Those  planters  who  embraced  Christian  steward-
ship  tried  to  shape  the  religious  lives  of  their chattel.

