A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Bernhard, Duke of
Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach

The Racial

Complexities

of Southern Society

In  1825  and  1826,  Bernhard,  heir  to  the  German  principality  of  Saxe-Weimar-
Eisenach, traveled throughout the United States, and in 1828 he published an
account of his adventures. After a military career, the duke ruled his principality
from 1853 until his death in 1862.

In New Orleans we were invited to a subscription
ball. . . . Only good society is invited to these balls. The
first to which we came was not very well attended; but
most of the ladies were very nice looking and well turned
out in the French manner. Their clothing was elegant after
the latest Paris fashions. They danced very well and did
credit to their French dancing masters. Dancing and some
music are the main branches of the education of a Creole
[an American-born white] woman. . . .

The native men are far from matching the women in
elegance. And they stayed only a short time, preferring
to escape to a so-called “Quarterons Ball” which they
find more amusing and where they do not have to stand
on ceremony. . . .

A “quarteron” [actually an octoroon, a person of
one-eighth African ancestry] is the offspring of a mes-
tizo mother and a white father, just as the mestizo is the
child of a mulatto and a white man. The “quarterons” are
almost completely white. There would be no way of rec-
ognizing them by their complexion, for they are often
fairer than the Creoles. Black hair and eyes are generally
the signs of their status, although some are quite blond.
The ball is attended by the free “quarterons.” Yet the deep-
est prejudice reigns against them on account of their
colored origin; the white women particularly feel or affect
to feel a strong repugnance to them.

Marriage between colored and white people is forbid-
den by the laws of the state. Yet the “quarterons,” for their
part, look upon the Negroes and mulattoes as inferiors
and are unwilling to mix with them. The girls therefore
have no other recourse than to become the mistresses of

white men. The “quarterons” regard such attachment
as the equivalent of marriage. They would not think of
entering upon it other than with a formal contract in
which the man engages to pay a stipulated sum to the
mother or father of the girl. . . .

Some of these women have inherited from their fathers
and lovers, and possess considerable fortunes. Their status
is nevertheless always very depressed. They must not ride
in the street in coaches, and their lovers can bring them to
the balls in their own conveyances only after nightfall. . . .
But many of these girls are much more carefully educated
than the whites, behave with more polish and more polite-
ness, and make their lovers happier than white wives their
husbands. And yet the white ladies speak of these unfortu-
nate depressed creatures with great disdain, even bitterness.
Because of the depth of these prejudices, many fathers send
their daughters, conceived after this manner, to France
where good education and wealth are no impediments to
the attainment of a respectable place.

Source: From Travels by His Highness Duke Bernhard of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach
Through North America in the Years 1825 and 1826, edited by C. J. Jeronimus and
translated by William Jeronimus. Copyright © 2001 University Press of America.
Used by permission of the Rowan & Littlefield Publishing Company.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  What does this passage suggest about the effect of slavery
and the meaning of racial identity on sexual relationships
and marriages in America and in France?

2.  How does Bernhard’s account help to explain the values
and outlook of the free black population in the South?

They  built  churches  on  their  plantations,  welcomed
evangelical  preachers,  and  required  their  slaves  to
attend services. A few encouraged African Americans
with spiritual “gifts” to serve as exhorters and deacons.
Most  of  these  planters  acted  from  sincere  Christian

belief, but they also hoped to counter abolitionist criti-
cism  and  to  use  religious  teachings  to  control  their
workers.

Indeed,  slavery’s  defenders  increasingly  used  reli-
gious  justifications  for  human  bondage.  Protestant

387

