388

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

ministers in the South pointed out that the Hebrews,
God’s chosen people, had owned slaves and that Jesus
Christ had never condemned slavery. As James Henry
Hammond  told  a  British  abolitionist  in  1845:  “What
God ordains and Christ sanctifies should surely com-
mand  the  respect  and  toleration  of  man.”  However,
many  aristocratic  defenders  of  slavery  were  absentee
owners  or  delegated  authority  to  overseers,  and  they
rarely glimpsed the day-to-day brutality of their regime
of  forced  labor.  “I  was  at  the  plantation last  Saturday
and the crop was in fine order,” an absentee’s son wrote
to his father, “but the negroes are most brutally scarred
& several have run off.”

engineers made casks, processed sugar, and built irri-
gation systems.

To  increase  output,  profit-seeking  cotton  planters
began during the 1820s to use a rigorous  gang-labor
system. Previously, many planters had supervised their
workers sporadically or assigned them specific tasks to
complete at their own pace. Now masters with twenty
or more slaves organized disciplined teams, or “gangs,”
supervised by black drivers and white overseers. They
instructed the supervisors to work the gangs at a steady
pace, clearing and plowing land or hoeing and picking
cotton. A traveler in Mississippi described two gangs
returning from work:

Cotton Entrepreneurs  There was much less hypoc-
risy  and  far  less  elegance  among  the  entrepreneurial
planters of the Cotton South. “The glare of expensive
luxury vanishes” in the black soil regions of Alabama
and  Mississippi,  John  Silk  Buckingham  remarked  as
he traveled through the Cotton South. Frederick Law
Olmsted — the future architect of New York’s Central
Park, who during the mid-1850s traveled through the
South for the New York Times — found that the planta-
tions  in  Mississippi  mostly  had  “but  small  and  mean
residences.” Aristocratic paternalism vanished as well.
A Mississippi planter put it plainly: “Everything has to
give way to large crops of cotton, land has to be culti-
vated wet or dry, negroes [must] work, hot or cold.”

Angry  at  being  sold  south  and  pressed  to  hard
labor, many slaves grew “mean” and stubborn. Those
who would not labor were subject to the lash. “Whiped
all  the  hoe  hands,”  Alabama  planter  James  Torbert
wrote matter-of-factly in his journal. Overseers pushed
workers hard because their salaries often depended on
the amount of cotton they were able “to make for the
market.” A Mississippi slave recalled, “When I wuz so
tired I cu’dnt hardly stan’, I had to spin my cut of cotton
befor’ I cu’d go to sleep. We  had to card, spin, an’ reel
at nite.”

Cotton was a demanding crop because of its long
growing  season.  Slaves  plowed  the  land  in  March;
dropped seeds into the ground in early April; and, once
the plants began to grow, continually chopped away the
surrounding  grasses.  In  between  these  tasks,  they
planted the corn and peas that would provide food for
them and the plantation’s hogs and chickens. When the
cotton  bolls  ripened  in  late  August,  the  long  four-
month  picking  season  began.  Slaves  in  the  Cotton
South, concluded Olmsted, worked “much harder and
more unremittingly” than those in the tobacco regions.
Moreover, fewer of them acquired craft skills than in
tobacco, sugar, and rice areas, where slave coopers and

First  came,  led  by  an  old  driver  carrying  a  whip,
forty of the largest and strongest women I ever saw
together; they were all in a simple uniform dress of
a  bluish  check  stuff,  the  skirts  reaching  little  below
the  knee. . . . They  carried  themselves  loftily,  each
having a hoe over the shoulder, and walking with a
free, powerful swing.

Next  marched  the  plow  hands  with  their  mules,  “the
cavalry, thirty strong, mostly men, but a few of them
women.” Finally, “a lean and vigilant white overseer, on
a brisk pony, brought up the rear.”

The gang-labor system enhanced profits by increas-
ing  productivity.  Because  slaves  in  gangs  finished
tasks in thirty-five minutes that took a white yeoman
planter an hour to complete, gang labor became ever
more  prevalent.  In  one  Georgia  county,  the  percent-
age of blacks working in gangs doubled between 1830
and 1850. As the price of raw cotton surged after 1846,
the  wealth  of  the  planter  class  skyrocketed.  And  no
wonder: nearly 2 million enslaved African Americans
now  labored  on  the  plantations  of  the  Cotton  South
and annually produced 4 million bales of the valuable
fiber.

Planters, Smallholding Yeomen,
and Tenants
Although  the  South  was  a  slave  society — that  is,  a
society in which the institution of slavery affected all
aspects of life — most white southerners did not own
slaves.  The  percentage  of  white  families  who  held
blacks  in  bondage  steadily  decreased — from  36  per-
cent in 1830, to 31 percent in 1850, to about 25 percent
a  decade  later.  However,  slave  ownership  varied  by
region. In some cotton-rich counties, 40 percent of the
white  families  owned  slaves;  in  the  hill  country  near
the  Appalachian  Mountains,  the  proportion  dropped
to 10 percent.

