CHAPTER 12

  The South Expands: Slavery and Society, 1800–1860

389

and  -women.  These  middling  planters  owned  almost
40 percent of the enslaved laborers and produced more
than 30 percent of the cotton. Often they pursued dual
careers  as  skilled  artisans  or  professional  men.  Thus
some of the fifteen slaves owned by Georgian Samuel L.
Moore worked in his brick factory, while others labored
on his farm. Dr. Thomas Gale used the income from
his  medical  practice  to  buy  a  Mississippi  plantation
that annually produced 150 bales of cotton. In Alabama,
lawyer Benjamin Fitzpatrick used his legal fees to buy
ten slaves.

Like Fitzpatrick, lawyers acquired wealth by man-
aging the affairs of the slave-owning elite, representing
planters and merchants in suits for debt, and helping
smallholders and tenants register their deeds and con-
tracts.  Standing  at  the  legal  crossroads  of  their  small
towns,  they  rose  to  prominence  and  regularly  won
election  to  public  office.  Less  than  1  percent  of  the
male population, in 1828 lawyers made up 16 percent
of the Alabama legislature and an astounding 26 per-
cent in 1849.

Smallholding Planters and Yeomen  Smallholding
slave owners were much less visible than the wealthy
grandees  and  the  middling  lawyer-planters.  These
planters held from one to five black laborers in bond-
age and owned a few hundred acres of land. Some small-
holders  were  well-connected  young  men  who  would
rise  to  wealth  when  their father’s  death  blessed  them
with more land and slaves. Others were poor but ambi-
tious men trying to pull themselves up by their boot-
straps, often encouraged by elite planters and pro slavery
advocates. “Ours is a proslavery form of Government,
and  the  proslavery  element  should  be  increased,”
declared a Georgia newspaper. “We would like to see
every white man at the South the owner of a family of
negroes.”  Some  aspiring  planters  achieved  modest
prosperity. A German settler reported from Alabama
in  1855  that  “nearly  all  his  countrymen”  who  emi-
grated with him were slaveholders. “They were poor on
their  arrival  in  the  country;  but  no  sooner  did  they
realize a little money than they invested it in slaves.”

Bolstered by the patriarchal ideology of the planter
class, yeomen farmers ruled their smallholdings with a
firm  hand. The  male  head  of  the
household  had
legal  authority
over  all  the  dependents — wives,
children, and slaves — and, accord-
ing to one South Carolina judge,
the  right  on  his  property  “to  be
as churlish as he pleases.” Yeomen
wives had little power; like women

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
By 1860, what differ-
ent groups made up
the South’s increasingly
complex society? How did
these groups interact?

The Inherent Brutality of Slavery

Like all systems of forced labor, American racial slavery relied
ultimately on physical coercion. Slave owners and overseers
routinely whipped slaves who worked slowly or deﬁed their
orders. On occasion, they applied the whip with such ferocity
that the slave was permanently injured or killed. This photo-
graph of a Mississippi slave named Gordon, taken after he
ﬂed to the Union army in Louisiana in 1863 and published in
Harper’s Weekly, stands as graphic testimony to the inherent
brutality of the system. Library of Congress.

Planter  Elites  A  privileged  minority  of  395,000
southern  families  owned  slaves  in  1860,  their  ranks
divided into a strict hierarchy. The top one-fifth of these
families owned twenty or more slaves. This elite — just
5 percent of the South’s white population — dominated
the  economy,  owning  over  50  percent  of  the  entire
slave population of 4 million and growing 50 percent of
the  South’s  cotton  crop.  The  average  wealth  of  these
planters was $56,000 (about $1.6 million in purchasing
power today); by contrast, a prosperous southern yeo-
man or northern farmer owned property worth a mere
$3,200.

Substantial  proprietors,  another  fifth  of  the  slave-
owning population, held title to six to twenty bondsmen

