390

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

in  the  North,  they  lost  their legal  identity  when  they
married.  To  express  their  concerns,  many  southern
women joined churches, where they usually outnum-
bered men by a margin of two to one. Women espe-
cially  welcomed  the  message  of  spiritual  equality
preached in evangelical Baptist and Methodist churches,
and  they  hoped  that  the  church  community  would
hold their husbands to the same standards of Christian
behavior  to  which  they  conformed.  However,  most
churches  supported  patriarchal  rule  and  told  female
members to remain in “wifely obedience,” whatever the
actions of their husbands.

Whatever  their  authority  within  the  household,
most southern yeomen lived and died as hardscrabble
farmers.  They  worked  alongside  their  slaves  in  the
fields,  struggled  to  make  ends  meet  as  their  families
grew,  and  moved  regularly  in  search  of  opportunity.
Thus, in 1847, James Buckner Barry left North Carolina
with  his  new  wife  and  two  slaves  to  settle  in  Bosque
County, Texas. There he worked part-time as an Indian
fighter while his slaves toiled on a drought-ridden farm

that barely kept the family in food. In South Carolina,
W. J. Simpson struggled for years as a smallholding cot-
ton planter and then gave up. He hired out one of his
two  slaves  and  went  to  work  as  an  overseer  on  his
father’s farm.

Less fortunate smallholders fell from the privileged
ranks  of  the  slave-owning  classes.  Selling  their  land
and  slaves  to  pay  off  debts,  they  joined  the  mass  of
propertyless tenants who farmed the estates of wealthy
landlords. In 1860, in Hancock County, Georgia, there
were  56  slave-owning  planters  and  300  propertyless
white  farm  laborers  and  factory  workers;  in  nearby
Hart County, 25 percent of the white farmers were ten-
ants. Across the South, about 40 percent of the white
population worked as tenants or farm laborers; as the
Southern Cultivator observed, they had “no legal right
nor interest in the soil [and] no homes of their own.”

Poor  Freemen  Propertyless  whites  suffered  the  ill
consequences of living in a slave society that accorded
little respect to hardworking white laborers. Nor could

North Carolina Emigrants: Poor White Folks

Completed in 1845, James Henry Beard’s (1811–1893) painting depicts a family moving north to
Ohio. Unlike many optimistic scenes of emigration, the picture conveys a sense of resigned despair.
The family members, led by a sullen, disheveled father, pause at a water trough while their cow
drinks and their dog chews a bone. The mother looks apprehensively toward the future as she
cradles a child; two barefoot older children listlessly await their father’s command. New York writer
Charles Briggs interpreted the painting as an “eloquent sermon on Anti-Slavery . . . , the blight of
Slavery has paralyzed the strong arm of the man and destroyed the spirit of the woman.” Although
primarily a portrait painter, Beard questioned the ethics and optimism of American culture in Ohio
Land Speculator (1840) and The Last Victim of the Deluge (1849), as well as in Poor White Folks.
Cincinnati Art Museum, Ohio, USA/Gift of the Proctor & Gamble Company/The Bridgeman Art Library.

