CHAPTER 12

  The South Expands: Slavery and Society, 1800–1860

391

they  hope  for  a  better  life  for  their  children,  because
slave  owners  refused  to  pay  taxes  to  fund  public
schools. Moreover, wealthy planters bid up the price of
African Americans, depriving white laborers and ten-
ants of easy access to the slave labor required to accu-
mulate wealth. Finally, planter-dominated legislatures
forced  all  white  men,  whether  they  owned  slaves  or
not,  to  serve  in  the  patrols  and  militias  that  deterred
black  uprisings.  The  majority  of  white  southerners,
Frederick Law Olmsted concluded, “are poor. They . . .
have little — very little — of the common comforts and
consolations  of  civilized  life.  Their  destitution  is  not
material only; it is intellectual and it is moral.”

Marking  this  moral  destitution,  poor  whites
enjoyed the psychological satisfaction that they ranked
above  blacks.  As  Alfred  Iverson,  a  U.S.  senator  from
Georgia  (1855–1861),  explained:  a  white  man  “walks
erect in the dignity of his color and race, and feels that
he  is  a  superior  being,  with  the  more  exalted  powers
and privileges than others.” To reinforce that sense of
racial superiority, planter James Henry Hammond told
his  poor  white  neighbors,  “In  a  slave  country  every
freeman is an aristocrat.”

Rejecting that half-truth, many southern whites fled
planter-dominated  counties  in  the  1830s  and  sought
farms in the Appalachian hill country and beyond — in
western  Virginia,  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  the  southern
regions of Illinois and Indiana, and Missouri. Living as
yeomen farmers, they used family labor to grow food-
stuffs  for  sustenance.  To  obtain cash  or  store  credit  to
buy agricultural implements, cloth, shoes, salt, and other
necessities,  yeomen  families  sold  their  surplus  crops,
raised hogs for market sale, and — when the price of cot-
ton  rose  sharply — grew  a  few  bales.  Their  goals  were
modest:  on  the  family  level,  they  wanted  to  preserve
their holdings and buy enough land to set up their chil-
dren  as  small-scale  farmers.  As  citizens,  smallholders
wanted to control their local government and elect men
of their own kind to public office. However, thoughtful
yeomen  understood  that  the  slave-based  cotton  econ-
omy sentenced family farmers to a subordinate place in
the social order. They could hope for a life of indepen-
dence and dignity only by moving north or farther west,
where labor was “free” and hard work was respected.

Expanding and Governing
the South
By the 1830s, settlers from the South had carried both
yeoman farming and plantation slavery into Arkansas
and  Missouri.  Between  those  states  and  the  Rocky

Mountains  stretched  great  grasslands.  An  army
explorer,  Major  Stephen  H.  Long,  thought  the  plains
region “almost wholly unfit for cultivation” and in 1820
labeled it the Great American Desert. The label stuck.
Americans looking for land turned south, to Mexican
territory. At the same time, elite planters struggled to
control state governments in the Cotton South.

The Settlement of Texas
After winning independence from Spain in 1821, the
Mexican  government  pursued  an  activist  settlement
policy. To encourage migration to the refigured state of
Coahuila y Tejas, it offered sizable land grants to its cit-
izens  and  to  American  emigrants.  Moses  Austin,  an
American land speculator, settled smallholding farm-
ers on his large grant, and his son, Stephen F. Austin,
acquired even more land — some 180,000 acres — which
he  sold  to  newcomers.  By  1835,  about  27,000  white
Americans  and  their  3,000  African  American  slaves
were  raising  cotton  and  cattle  in  the  well-watered
plains and hills of eastern and central Texas. They far
outnumbered the 3,000 Mexican residents, who lived
primarily near the southwestern Texas towns of Goliad
and San Antonio.

When Mexico in 1835 adopted a new constitution
creating a stronger central government and dissolving
state legislatures, the Americans split into two groups.
The  “war  party,”  led  by  Sam  Houston  and  recent
migrants  from  Georgia,  demanded  independence  for
Texas.  Members  of  the  “peace  party,”  led  by  Stephen
Austin,  negotiated  with  the  central  government  in
Mexico  City  for  greater  political  autonomy.  They
believed  Texas  could  flourish  within  a  decentralized
Mexican  republic,  a  “federal”  constitutional  system
favored by the Liberal Party in Mexico (and advocated
in the United States by Jacksonian Democrats). Austin
won significant concessions for the Texans, including
an exemption from a law ending slavery, but in 1835
Mexico’s  president,  General  Antonio  López  de  Santa
Anna,  nullified  them.  Santa  Anna  wanted  to  impose
national authority throughout Mexico. Fearing central
control, the war party provoked a rebellion that most
of  the  American  settlers  ultimately  supported.  On
March  2,  1836,  the  American  rebels  proclaimed  the
independence  of  Texas  and
adopted  a  constitution  legalizing
slavery.

To  put  down  the  rebellion,
President Santa Anna led an army
that  wiped  out  the  Texan  garri-
son  defending  the  Alamo  in  San
Antonio and then captured Goliad,

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
What issues divided the
Mexican government and
the Americans in Texas,
and what proposals sought
to resolve them?

