392

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Starting Out in Texas

Thousands of white farmers, some owning a few slaves, moved onto small farms in Texas and Arkansas
during the 1840s and 1850s. They lived in crudely built log huts; owned a few cows, horses, and oxen; and
eked out a meager living by planting a few acres of cotton in addition to their crops of corn. Their aspirations
were simple: to achieve modest prosperity during their lives and to assist their children to own farms of their
own. Daughters of the Republic of Texas Library.

executing about 350 prisoners of war (Map 12.2). Santa
Anna  thought  that  he  had  crushed  the  rebellion,  but
New Orleans and New York newspapers romanticized
the deaths at the Alamo of folk heroes Davy Crockett
and  Jim  Bowie.  Drawing  on  anti-Catholic  sentiment
aroused  by  Irish  immigration  and  the  massacre  at
Goliad,  they  urged  Americans  to  “Remember  the
Alamo” and depicted the Mexicans as tyrannical butch-
ers in the service of the pope. American adventurers,
lured by offers of land grants, flocked to Texas to join
the rebel forces. Commanded by General Sam Houston,
the  Texans  routed  Santa  Anna’s  overconfident  army
in the Battle of San Jacinto in April 1836, winning de
facto independence. The Mexican government refused
to recognize the Texas Republic but, for the moment,
did not seek to conquer it.

The  Texans  voted  for  annexation  by  the  United
States, but President Martin Van Buren refused to bring
the issue before Congress. As a Texas diplomat reported,
the  cautious  Van  Buren  and  other  party  politicians
feared that annexation would spark a war with Mexico
and,  beyond  that,  a  “desperate  death-struggle . . .
between the North and the South [over the extension
of slavery]; a struggle involving the probability of a dis-
solution of the Union.”

The Politics of Democracy
As  national  leaders  refused  admission  to  Texas,  elite
planters faced political challenges in the Cotton South.
Unlike  the  planter-aristocrats  who  ruled  the  colo-
nial  world,  they  lived  in  a  republican  society  with  a

