CHAPTER 12

  The South Expands: Slavery and Society, 1800–1860

393

INDIAN TERR.

Red R.

ARK.

DISPUTED
TERRITORY
Pecos R.
Claimed by Texas
(1836–1850)

REPUBLIC OF TEXAS
(1836–1845)

Sabine R.
Trinity R.
Brazos R.
San Antonio Road

Edwards’s
Colony

Austin’s
Colony

LA.

San Jacinto
April 21, 1836

Galveston
Bay

San Antonio

Rio Gra

n
de

Nueces R.

Goliad

DeWitt’s
Colony

The Alamo
March 6, 1836

Corpus
Christi Bay

Gulf of Mexico

Matamoros

N

S

W

0

0

E

MEXICO
200 miles

100

100

200 kilometers

Main battles in
Texas War of Independence

MAP 12.2
American Settlements, the Texas-Mexican War,
and Boundary Disputes

During the 1820s the Mexican government encouraged
Americans to settle in the sparsely populated state of
Coahuila y Tejas. By 1835 the nearly 30,000 Americans
far outnumbered Mexican residents. To put down an
American-led revolt, General Santa Anna led 6,000
soldiers into Tejas in 1836. After overwhelming the
rebels at the Alamo in March, Santa Anna set out
to capture the Texas Provisional Government, which
had ﬂed to Galveston. But the Texans’ victory at San
Jacinto in April ended the war and secured de facto
independence for the Republic of Texas (1836–1845).
However, the annexation of Texas to the United States
sparked a war with Mexico in 1846, and the state’s
boundaries remained in dispute until the Compromise
of 1850.

democratic ethos. The Alabama Constitution of 1819
granted suffrage to all white men; it also provided for a
secret  ballot  (rather  than  voice-voting);  apportion-
ment of legislative seats based on population; and the
election  of  county  supervisors,  sheriffs,  and  clerks  of
court. Given these democratic provisions, political fac-
tions  in  Alabama  had  to  compete  for  votes.  When  a
Whig newspaper sarcastically asked whether the state’s
policies  should  “be  governed  and  controlled  by  the
whim  and  caprice  of  the  majority  of  the  people,”
Democrats hailed the power of the common folk. They
called on “Farmers, Mechanics, laboring men” to repu-
diate  Whig  “aristocrats . . . the  soft  handed  and  soft
headed gentry.”

Taxation Policy  Whatever the electioneering rheto-
ric, most Whig and Democrat political candidates were
men of substance. In the early 1840s, nearly 90 percent
of Alabama’s legislators owned slaves, testimony to the
political power of the slave-owning minority. Still, rel-
atively few lawmakers — only about 10 percent — were

rich planters, a group voters by and large distrusted. “A
rich man cannot sympathize with the poor,” declared
one  candidate.  Consequently,  the  majority  of  elected
state officials, and most county officials, in the Cotton
South  came  from  the  ranks  of  middle-level  planters
and planter-lawyers. Astute politicians, they refrained
from laying “oppressive” taxes on the people, particu-
larly the white majority who owned no slaves. Between
1830 and 1860, the Alabama legislature obtained about
70 percent of the state’s  revenue from taxes on slaves
and land. Another 10 to 15 percent came from levies
on carriages, gold watches, and other luxury goods and
on the capital invested in banks, transportation com-
panies, and manufacturing enterprises.

To  win  the  votes  of  taxpaying  slave  owners,  Ala-
bama  Democrats  advocated  limited  government  and
low  taxes.  They  attacked  their  Whig  opponents  for
favoring  higher  taxes  and  for  providing  government
subsidies for banks, canals, railroads, and other inter-
nal  improvements.  “Voting  against  appropriations  is
the  safe  and  popular  side,”  one  Democratic  legislator
declared,  and  his  colleagues  agreed;  until  the  1850s,
they rejected most of the bills that would have granted
subsidies to transportation companies or banks.

If tax policy in Alabama had a democratic thrust,
elsewhere  in  the  South  it  did  not.  In  some  states,
wealthy planters used their political muscle to exempt
slave property from taxation. Or they shifted the bur-
den  to  backcountry  yeomen, who  owned  low-quality
pasturelands,  by  taxing  farms  according  to  acreage
rather than value. Planter-legislators also spared them-
selves the cost of building fences around their fields by
enacting laws that required yeomen to “fence in” their
livestock.  And,  during  the  1850s,  wealthy  legislators
throughout  the  South  used  public  funds  to  subsidize
the  canals  and  railroads  in  which  they  had  invested,
ignoring the protests of yeoman-backed legislators.

The  Paradox  of  Southern  Prosperity  Even with-
out  these  internal  improvements,  the  South  had  a
strong economy. Indeed, it ranked fourth in the world
in 1860, with a per capita income among whites higher
than that of France and Germany. As a contributor to a
Georgia newspaper argued in the 1850s, planters and
yeomen should not complain about “tariffs, and mer-
chants, and manufacturers” because “the most highly
prosperous  people  now  on  earth,  are  to  be  found  in
these very [slave] States.” Such arguments tell only part
of the story. Nearly all African Americans — 40 percent
of the population — lived in dire and permanent pov-
erty.  And,  although  the  average  southern  white  man
was 80 percent richer than the average northerner in

