394

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the political
power of slave owners
affect tax policy and the
character of economic
development in the south-
ern states?

1860,  the  southerner’s  non-slave
wealth  was  only  60  percent  of
the  northern  average.  Moreover,
the  wealth  of  the  industrializing
Northeast  was  increasing  at  a
faster pace than that of the South.
Between  1820  and  1860,  slave-
related  trade  across  the  Atlantic
declined  from  12.6  percent  of

world trade to 5.3 percent.

Influential  southerners  blamed  the  shortcomings
of  their  plantation-based  economy  on  outsiders:
“Purely  agricultural  people,”  intoned  slave-owning
planter-politician James Henry Hammond, “have been
in  all  ages  the  victims  of  rapacious  tyrants  grinding
them down.” And they steadfastly defended their way
of  life.  “We  have  no  cities — we  don’t  want  them,”
boasted  U.S.  senator  Louis  Wigfall  of  Texas  in  1861.
“We want no manufactures: we desire no trading, no

mechanical  or  manufacturing  classes. . . . As  long  as
we have our rice, our sugar, our tobacco, and our cot-
ton, we can command wealth to purchase all we want.”
So  wealthy  southerners  continued  to  buy  land  and
slaves, a strategy that neglected investments in the great
technological innovations of the nineteenth century —
water-  and  steam-powered  factories,  machine  tools,
steel  plows,  and  crushed-gravel  roads — that  would
have raised the South’s productivity and wealth.

Urban growth, the key to prosperity in Europe and
the North, occurred primarily in the commercial cities
around  the  periphery  of  the  South:  New  Orleans,  St.
Louis, and Baltimore. Factories — often staffed by slave
labor — appeared primarily in the Chesapeake region,
which had a diverse agricultural economy and a sur-
plus  of  bound  workers.  Within  the  Cotton  South,
wealthy  planters  invested  in  railroads  primarily  to
grow  more  cotton;  when  the  Western  &  Atlantic
Railroad  reached  the  Georgia  upcountry,  the  cotton

Colonel and Mrs. James A. Whiteside, Son Charles and Servants

James A. Whiteside (1803–1861) was a Tennessee lawyer, politician, land speculator, and entrepreneur, with
investments in iron manufacturing, banking, steamboats, and railroads. In 1857, he became vice president of
the Nashville, Chattanooga, and St. Louis Railroad. The following year, Whiteside persuaded the Scottish-
born painter James Cameron (1817–1882) to move to Chattanooga, where Cameron completed this
ambitious portrait of the colonel; his second wife, Harriet; their youngest child, Charles; and two enslaved
“servants.” The painting shows the family at home, with a view of Chattanooga and of Lookout Mountain,
where the colonel had built a hotel. Whiteside died from pneumonia in 1861 after returning home from
Virginia with his son James, who had fallen ill while serving in the Confederate army. Hunter Museum of
American Art, Chattanooga, Tennessee. Gift of Mr. & Mrs. Thomas B. Whiteside, 1975.7.

