CHAPTER 12

  The South Expands: Slavery and Society, 1800–1860

395

crop  there  quickly  doubled.  Cotton  and  agriculture
remained King.

ritual scars, had maintained the religious practices of
their homelands.

Slavery  also  deterred  Europeans  from  migrating
to  the  South,  because  they  feared  competition  from
bound  labor.  Their  absence  deprived  the  region  of
skilled  artisans  and  of  hardworking  laborers  to  drain
swamps, dig canals, smelt iron, and work on railroads.
When entrepreneurs tried to hire slaves for these dan-
gerous tasks, planters replied that “a negro’s life is too
valuable to be risked.” Slave owners also feared that hir-
ing out would make their slaves too independent. As a
planter  told  Frederick  Law  Olmsted,  such  workers
“had too much liberty . . . and got a habit of roaming
about and taking care of themselves.”

Thus,  despite  its  increasing  size  and  booming
exports, the South remained an economic colony: Great
Britain and the North bought its staple crops and pro-
vided its manufactures, financial services, and shipping
facilities.  In  1860,  some  84  percent  of  southerners —
more  than  double  the  percentage  in  the  northern
states — still worked in agriculture, and southern facto-
ries turned out only 10 percent of the nation’s manufac-
tures. The South’s fixation on an “exclusive and exhaust-
ing”  system  of  cotton  monoculture  and  slave  labor
filled  South  Carolina  textile  entrepreneur  William
Gregg  with  “dark  forebodings”:  “It  has  produced  us
such  an  abundant  supply  of  all  the  luxuries  and  ele-
gances of life, with so little exertion on our part, that we
have  become  enervated,  unfitted  for  other  and  more
laborious pursuits.”

The African American World
By the 1820s, the cultural life of most slaves reflected
both  the  values  and  customs  of  their  West  African
ancestors and the language, laws, and religious beliefs
of the South’s white population. This mix of African-
and  European-derived  cultural  values  persisted  for
decades  because  whites  discouraged  blacks  from
assimilating  and  because  slaves  prized  their  diverse
African heritages.

Evangelical Black Protestantism
The  emergence  of  black  Christianity  illustrated  the
synthesis of African and European cultures. From the
1790s to the 1840s, the Second Great Awakening swept
over the South, and evangelical Baptist and Methodist
preachers  converted  thousands  of  white  families  and
hundreds of enslaved blacks (see Chapter 8). Until that
time,  African-born  blacks,  often  identifiable  by  their

African Religions and Christian Conversion  Afri-
cans carried their traditional religious practices to the
United States. Some practiced Islam, but the majority
relied  on  African  gods  and  spirits.  As  late  as  1842,
Charles  C.  Jones,  a  Presbyterian  minister,  noted  that
the blacks on his family’s plantation in Georgia believed
“in second-sight, in apparitions, charms, witchcraft . . .
[and other] superstitions brought from Africa.” Fearing
for their own souls if they withheld “the means of sal-
vation” from African Americans, Jones and other zeal-
ous Protestant preachers and planters set out to convert
slaves.

Other  Protestant  crusaders  came  from  the  ranks
of pious black men and women who had become Christ-
ians in the Chesapeake. Swept to the Cotton South by
the  domestic  slave  trade,  they  carried  with  them  the
evangelical message of emotional conversion, ritual bap-
tism,  and  communal  spirituality.  Equally  important,
these crusaders adapted Protestant doctrines to black
needs. Enslaved Christians pointed out that blacks as
well  as  whites  were  “children  of  God”  and  should  be
treated accordingly. Black  Protes-
tantism generally ignored the doc-
trines of original sin and predesti-
nation,  and  preachers  didn’t  use
biblical passages that encouraged
unthinking  obedience  to  author-
ity.  A  white  minister  in  Liberty
County,  Georgia,  reported  that
when he urged slaves to obey their masters, “one half of
my audience deliberately rose up and walked off.”

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
How did the Second Great
Awakening affect the
development of black
religion?

Black Worship
Indeed, some African American con-
verts envisioned the deity as the Old Testament warrior
who  had  liberated  the  Jews  and  so  would  liberate
them. Inspired by a vision of Christ, Nat Turner led his
bloody rebellion against slavery in Virginia (see Chap-
ter  11).  Other  black  Christians  saw  themselves  as
Chosen People: “de people dat is born of God.” Charles
Davenport, a Mississippi slave, recalled black preachers
“exhort[ing] us dat us was de chillun o’ Israel in de wil-
derness an’ de Lawd done sont us to take dis lan’ o’ milk
an’ honey.”

Still,  African  Americans  expressed  their  Chris-
tianity  in  distinctive  ways.  The  thousands  of  blacks
who joined the Methodist Church respected its ban on
profane dancing but praised the Lord in what minister
Henry George Spaulding called the “religious dance of
the Negroes.” Spaulding described the African-derived

