396

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Black Kitchen Ball

From time to time, festive celebrations punctuated the demanding work routine of slaves’ lives. In this
1838 painting, Kitchen Ball at White Sulphur Springs Virginia, African Americans dance to the music
of a ﬁddle and a ﬁfe (on the right). Note the light complexions and Europeanized features of the most
prominent ﬁgures, the result of either racial mixing or the cultural perspective of the artist. The painter,
Christian Mayr, was born in Germany in 1805 and migrated to the United States in 1833. After working
for years as a traveling portrait painter, Mayr settled in New York City in 1845 and died there in 1850.
North Carolina Museum of Art, Raleigh. Purchased with funds from the State of North Carolina.

“ring  shout”  this  way:  “Three  or  four,  standing  still,
clapping their hands and beating time with their feet,
commence singing in unison one of the peculiar shout
melodies,  while  the  others  walk  around  in  a  ring,  in
single file, joining also in the song.” The songs them-
selves were usually collective creations, devised spon-
taneously from bits of old hymns and tunes. Recalled
an ex-slave:

Africa, and dey’d all take it up and keep at it, and keep
a-addin’ to it, and den it would be a spiritual.

By  such  African-influenced  means,  black  congrega-
tions devised a distinctive and joyous brand of Protes-
tant  worship  to  sustain  them  on  the  long  journey  to
emancipation  and  the  Promised  Land.  “O  my  Lord
delivered Daniel,” the slaves sang, “O  why not deliver
me too?”

We’d all be at the “prayer house” de Lord’s day, and
de white preacher he’d splain de word and read whar
Esekial  done  say — Dry  bones  gwine  ter  lib  ergin.
And, honey, de Lord would come a-shinin’ thoo dem
pages and revive dis ole nigger’s  heart, and I’d jump
up  dar  and  den  and  holler  and  shout  and  sing  and
pat,  and  dey  would  all  cotch  de  words  and  I’d  sing
it  to  some  ole  shout  song  I’d  heard  ’em  sing  from

Forging Families and Communities
Black  Protestantism  was  one  facet  of  an  increasingly
homogeneous  African  American  culture  in  the  rural
South. Even in South Carolina — a major point of entry
for imported slaves — only 20 percent of the black resi-
dents in 1820 had been born in Africa. The domestic

