CHAPTER 12

  The South Expands: Slavery and Society, 1800–1860

397

slave  trade  mingled  blacks  from  many  states,  erased
regional differences, and prompted the emergence of a
core culture in the Lower Mississippi Valley. A prime
example was the fate of the Gullah dialect, which com-
bined words from English and a variety of African lan-
guages in an African grammatical structure. Spoken by
blacks in the Carolina low country well into the twen-
tieth  century,  Gullah  did  not  take  root  on  the  cotton
plantations of Alabama and Mississippi. There, slaves
from Carolina were far outnumbered by migrants from
the Chesapeake, who spoke black English. Like Gullah,
black English used double negatives and other African
grammatical  forms,  but  it  consisted  primarily  of
English words rendered with West African pronuncia-
tion  (for  example,  with  th  pronounced  as  d — “de
preacher”).

Nonetheless,  African  influences  remained  signifi-
cant. At least one-third of the slaves who entered the
United States  between 1776 and 1809  came from the
Congo region of West-Central Africa, and they brought
their  cultures  with  them.  As  traveler  Isaac  Holmes
reported  in  1821:  “In  Louisiana,  and  the  state  of
Mississippi, the slaves . . . dance for several hours dur-
ing  Sunday  afternoon.  The  general  movement  is  in
what they call the Congo dance.” Similar descriptions
of  blacks  who  “danced  the  Congo  and  sang  a  purely
African  song  to  the  accompaniment  of . . . a  drum”
appeared as late as 1890.

African  Americans  also  continued  to  respect
African incest taboos by shunning marriages between
cousins.  On  the  Good  Hope  Plantation  in  South
Carolina, nearly half of the slave children born between
1800 and 1857 were related by blood to one another;
yet  when  they  married,  only  one  of  every  forty-one
unions  took  place  between  cousins.  White  planters
were  not  the  source  of  this  taboo:  cousin  marriages
were frequent among the 440 South Carolina men and
women who owned at least one hundred slaves in 1860,
in  part  because  such  unions  kept  wealth  within  an
extended family (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 398).

Unlike  white  marriages,  slave  unions  were  not
legally binding. According to a Louisiana judge, “slaves
have  no  legal  capacity  to  assent  to  any  contract . . .
because  slaves  are  deprived  of  all  civil  rights.”  None-
theless, many African Americans took marriage vows
before  Christian  ministers  or  publicly  marked  their
union  in  ceremonies  that  included  the  West  African
custom of jumping over a broomstick together. Once
married,  newly  arrived  young  people  in  the  Cotton
South often chose older people in their new communi-
ties as fictive “aunts” and “uncles.” The slave trade had
destroyed their family, but not their family values.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
In what respects did
African cultural practices
affect the lives of enslaved
African Americans?

The creation of fictive kinship
ties  was  part  of  a  community-
building process, a partial substi-
tute  for  the  family  ties  that  sus-
tained  whites  during  periods  of
crisis.  Naming  children  was
another. Recently imported slaves
frequently  gave  their  children  African  names.  Males
born on Friday, for example, were often called Cuffee —
the name of that day in several West African languages.
Many American-born parents chose names of British
origin, but they usually named sons after fathers, uncles,
or  grandfathers  and  daughters  after  grandmothers.
Those  transported  to  the  Cotton  South  often  named
their children for relatives left behind. Like incest rules
and marriage rituals, this intergenerational sharing of
names evoked memories of a lost world and bolstered
kin ties in the new one.

Negotiating Rights
By forming stable families and communities, African
Americans  gradually  created  a  sense  of  order  in  the
harsh and arbitrary world of slavery. In a few regions,
slaves won substantial control over their lives.

Working Lives  During the Revolutionary era, blacks
in  the  rice-growing  lowlands  of  South  Carolina  suc-
cessfully asserted the right to labor by the “task.” Under
the  task  system, workers had to complete a  precisely
defined  job  each  day — for  example,  digging  up  a
quarter-acre of land, hoeing half an acre, or pounding
seven mortars of rice. By working hard, many finished
their  tasks  by  early  afternoon,  a  Methodist  preacher
reported, and had “the rest of the day for themselves,
which  they  spend  in  working  their  own  private
fields . . . planting rice, corn, potatoes, tobacco &c. for
their own use and profit.”

Slaves  on  sugar  and  cotton  plantations  led  more
regimented lives, thanks to the gang-labor system. As
one field hand put it, there was “no time off [between]
de change of de seasons. . . . Dey was allus clearin’ mo’
lan’ or sump’. ” Many slaves faced bans on growing crops
on their own. “It gives an excuse for trading,” explained
one owner, and that encouraged roaming and indepen-
dence.  Still,  many  masters  hired  out  surplus  workers
as  teamsters,  drovers,  steamboat  workers,  turpentine
gatherers, and railroad builders; in 1856, no fewer than
435 hired slaves laid track for the Virginia & Tennessee
Railroad. Many owners regretted the result. As an over-
seer remarked about a slave named John, “He is not as
good a hand as he was before he went to Alabamy.”

