T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Childhood in Black

and White

A  major  theme  of  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe’s  powerful  antislavery  novel  Uncle
Tom’s Cabin is the sin of separating black families and denying parental rights to
enslaved mothers and fathers. The following documents reveal the dynamics of
plantation family life, and particularly mother-child relations.

1.  Ex-slave Josephine Smith, interviewed at age
ninety-four by Mary A. Hicks, Raleigh, North
Carolina, 1930s. Slave children had loving but
limited relationships with their mothers, who
worked long hours in the ﬁelds and were
sometimes sold away from their children.

I ‘members seein’ a heap o’ slave sales, wid de niggers in
chains, an’ de spec’ulators sellin’ an’ buyin’ dem off. I also
‘members seein’ a drove of slaves wid nothin’ on but a rag
‘twixt dere legs bein’ galloped roun’ ‘fore de buyers. ‘Bout
de wust thing dat eber I seed do’ wuz a slave ‘woman at
Louisburg who had been sold off from her three weeks
old baby, an wuz bein’ marched ter New Orleans.

She had walked till she quz give out, an’ she wuz weak

enough ter fall in de middle o’ de road. . . .  As I pass by
dis ‘oman begs me in God’s name fer a drink o’ water, an’
I gives it ter her. I ain’t neber be so sorry fer nobody. . . .
Dey walk fer a little piece an’ dis ‘oman fall out. She dies
dar side o’ de road, an’ right dar dey buries her, cussin’,
dey tells me, ’bout losin’ money on her.

2.  “Narrative of James Curry, a Fugitive Slave,”

The Liberator, January 10, 1840. The abolitionist
newspaper The Liberator published heartrending
accounts of death and separation in slave families
and how “ﬁctive kinship” assisted the survivors.

My mother’s labor was very hard. She would go to the
house in the morning, take her pail upon her head, and
go away to the cow-pen, and milk fourteen cows. She
then put on the bread for the family breakfast, and got
the cream ready for churning, and set a little child to
churn it, she having the care of from ten to fifteen chil-
dren, whose mothers worked in the field. . . . Among the
slave children, were three little orphans, whose mothers,
at their death, committed them to the care of my mother.
One of them was a babe. She took them and treated them
as her own. The master took no care about them. She
always took a share of the cloth she had provided for
her own children, to cover these little friendless ones.

3.  Former slave Barney Alford, interview for the
Works Progress Administration in Mississippi,
1930s.

398

Ole mammy ‘Lit’ wus mity ole en she lived in one corner
of de big yard en she keered fur all de black chilluns while
de old folks wurk in de field. Mammy Lit wus good to all
de chilluns en I had ter help her wid dem chilluns en keep
dem babies on de pallet. Mammy Lit smoked a pipe, en
sum times I wuld hide dat pipe, en she wuld slap me fur
it, den sum times I wuld run way en go ter de kitchen
whar my mammy wus at wurk en mammy Lit wuld
hafter cum fur me en den she wuld whip me er gin.
She sed I wus bad.

4.  “Mrs. Meriwether Administering Bitters,” illus-

tration from John Pendleton Kennedy, Swallow
Barn, Or, A Sojourn in the Old Dominion, 1851.
Bitters — strong alcoholic beverages ﬂavored with
bitter herbs — were administered as medicine in
the nineteenth century, as in this depiction of a
planter’s wife tending to enslaved children. Ken-
nedy’s cheerful depictions of Virginia plantation life
in this popular book, ﬁrst published in 1832, rein-
forced the notion of slavery as a “positive good.”

Source: Picture Research Consultants & Archives.

