5.  G. M. J., “Early Culture of Children,” 1855. This

excerpt from a Christian advice manual for mothers
reﬂects the values of the mid-nineteenth-century
white Protestant middle class.

“Train up a child in the way he should go,” is a law as
imperative in the 19th century, as when first uttered by
the lips of the wise man. Mothers are the natural execu-
tors of this law to their daughters. Nothing but the most
unavoidable and pressing force of circumstances, should
wrench this power from their hands. Who will guard with
a mother’s jealous eye the health, habits, morals, and reli-
gion of this most delicate part of creation. . . . How often I
have been pained to see mothers place those delicate plants

in the nursery with servants, whose tastes, feelings, mor-
als, manners, and language are but a little removed from
the lower animals of creation; there to receive impres-
sions, and imbibe habits, which will grow with their
growth, and strengthen with their strength, until like the
branches of the giant oak, they shall expand and deepen
into a shade that will forever conceal the parent stock.

6.  Visiting Cards Created by Philadelphia Portrait

Painter and Photographer Peregrine F. Cooper, As
We Found Them (left), As They Are Now (right),
1864. One of the ways to “train up a child in the
way he should go” was to inculcate abolitionist
sentiments early and often.

Source: George Eastman House.

Sources: (1) WPA Slave Narrative Project, 1936–38, learnnc.org; (2) “Narrative of James Curry, a Fugitive Slave,” The Liberator, January 10, 1840, learnnc.org; (3) The MS Gen Web
Project, msgw.org/slaves/alford-xslave.htm; (5) Home Garner; or the Intel lec tual and Moral Store House, ed. Mary G. Clarke (Philadelphia: J. P. Lippincott & Co., 1855), 115.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

1.  What do these sources reveal about slave communities?
About the extent to which the ideology of “benevolent
paternalism” governed the behavior of slave owners?

2.  How does the engraving (source 4) compare to the descrip-
tions of the care of slave children (sources 1–3)? What
biases, if any, can you detect in these sources?

3.  How would a person holding the beliefs described in source
5 react to the engraving of Mrs. Meriwether? To images
showing slave “mammies” raising the master’s children?
4.  How do the images of enslaved children in source 6 pertain
to “train[ing] up a child in the way he should go”? How
effective are they? What emotions do they play upon?

In the political system, debate over “the peculiar institution”
of slavery often focused on property rights and constitutional
principles. In the actual world of the plantation, human
bondage evoked a range of human emotions — jealousy,
resentment, anger, love, fear, tenderness — and human pain.
Write an essay that assesses the economic, legal, and political
arguments over slavery in light of the experiences of enslaved
mothers and children.

399

