400

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Antebellum Slave Quarters

During the colonial period, owners
often housed their slaves by gender
in communal barracks. In the
nineteenth century, slaves usually
lived in family units in separate
cabins. The slave huts on this South
Carolina plantation were sturdily
built but had few windows. Inside,
they were sparsely furnished. Library
of Congress.

The planters’ greatest fear was that enslaved African
Americans — a  majority  of  the  population  in  most
cotton-growing  counties — would  rise  in  rebellion.
Legally  speaking,  owners  had  virtually  unlimited
power over their slaves. “The power of the master must
be  absolute,”  intoned  Justice  Thomas  Ruffin  of  the
North Carolina Supreme Court in 1829. But absolute
power required brutal coercion, and only hardened or
sadistic  masters  had  the  stomach  for  such  violence.
“These  poor  negroes,  receiving  none  of  the  fruits  of
their labor,  do  not  love  work,”  explained  one  woman
who worked her own farm; “if we had slaves, we should
have to . . . beat them to make use of them.”

barns, poisoning his food, or destroying his crops. Fear
of resistance, as well as critical scrutiny by abolitionists,
prompted many masters to reduce their reliance on the
lash and use positive incentives such as food and spe-
cial privileges. Noted Frederick Law Olmsted: “Men of
sense have discovered that it was better to offer them
rewards  than  to  whip  them.”  Nonetheless,  owners
could always resort to violence, and countless masters
regularly asserted their power by demanding sex from
their  female  slaves.  As  ex-slave  Bethany  Veney
lamented  in  her  autobiography,  from  “the  unbridled
lust  of  the  slave-owner . . .  the  law  holds . . . no  pro-
tecting arm” over black women.

Moreover, passive resistance by African Americans
seriously limited their owners’ power. Slaves slowed the
pace of work by feigning illness and losing or breaking
tools.  One  Maryland  slave,  faced  with  transport  to
Mississippi and separation from his wife, flatly refused
“to  accompany  my  people,  or  to
be exchanged or sold,” his owner
reported.  Masters  ignored  such
feelings at their peril. A slave (or a
relative) might retaliate by setting
fire  to  the  master’s  house  and

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
How successful were slaves
in securing signiﬁcant con-
trol over their lives?

Survival  Strategies  Slavery  remained  an  exploit-
ative system grounded in fear and coercion. Over the
decades,  hundreds  of  individual  slaves  responded  by
attacking their masters and overseers. But only a  few
blacks — among  them  Gabriel  and  Martin  Prosser
(1800)  and  Nat  Turner  (1831) — plotted  mass  upris-
ings. Most slaves recognized that revolt would be futile;
they  lacked  the  autonomous  institutions  such  as  the
communes of European peasants, for example, needed
to  organize  a  successful  rebellion.  Moreover,  whites

