CHAPTER 12

  The South Expands: Slavery and Society, 1800–1860

401

were numerous, well armed, and determined to main-
tain their position of racial superiority.

“pegged down to one single spot, and must take root
there or die.”

Escape was equally problematic. Blacks in the Upper
South could flee to the North, but only by leaving their
family and kin. Slaves in the Lower South escaped to
sparsely settled regions of Florida, where some inter-
married with the Seminole Indians. Elsewhere in the
South,  escaped  slaves  eked  out  a  meager  existence
in  inhospitable  marshy  areas  or  mountain  valleys.
Consequently, most African Ameri cans remained on
plantations;  as  Frederick  Douglass  put  it,  they  were

“An Account of the Late Intended Insurrection,
Charleston, South Carolina”

In 1820, Charleston had a free black population of 1,500
and an array of African American institutions, including the
Brown Fellowship Society (for those of mixed racial ancestry)
and an African Methodist Episcopal (AME) church. In 1822,
Charleston authorities accused a free black, Denmark Vesey,
of organizing a revolt to free the city’s slaves. Although
historians long accepted the truth of that charge, recent
scholarship suggests that Vesey’s only offense was antago-
nizing some whites by claiming his rights as a free man and
that fearful slave owners conjured up the plot. Regardless,
South Carolina ofﬁcials hanged Vesey and thirty-four alleged
co-conspirators and tore down the AME church where they
allegedly plotted the uprising. David M. Rubenstein Rare Book &
Manuscript Library, Duke University.

“Taking root” meant building the best possible lives
for themselves. Over time, enslaved African Americans
pressed their owners for a greater share of the product of
their labor, much like unionized workers in the North
were  doing.  Thus  slaves  insisted  on  getting  paid  for
“overwork” and on the right to cultivate a garden and sell
its produce. “De menfolks tend to de gardens round dey
own house,” recalled a Louisiana slave. “Dey raise some
cotton and sell it to massa and git li’l money dat way.”
Enslaved women raised poultry and sold chickens and
eggs.  An  Alabama  slave  remembered  buying  “Sunday
clothes  with  dat  money,  sech  as  hats  and  pants  and
shoes and dresses.” By the 1850s, thousands of African
Americans were reaping the small rewards of this under-
ground economy, and some accumulated sizable prop-
erty.  Enslaved  Georgia  carpenter  Alexander  Steele
owned four horses, a mule, a silver watch, two cows, a
wagon, and large quantities of fodder, hay, and corn.

Whatever their material circumstances, few slaves
accepted  the  legitimacy  of  their  status.  Although  he
was fed well and never whipped, a former slave told an
English  traveler,  “I  was  cruelly  treated  because  I  was
kept in slavery.”

The Free Black Population
Some  African  Americans  escaped  slavery  through
flight or a grant of freedom by their owners and, if they
lived in the North, through gradual emancipation laws
that,  by  1840,  had  virtually  ended  bound  labor.  The
proportion  of  free  blacks  rose  from  8  percent  of  the
African American population in 1790 to about 13 per-
cent between 1820 and 1840, and then (because of high
birthrates  among  enslaved  blacks)  fell  to  11  percent.
Still, the number of free blacks continued to grow. In
the slave state of Maryland in 1860, half of all African
Americans  were  free,  and  many  more  were  “term”
slaves, guaranteed their freedom in exchange for a few
more years of work.

Northern  Blacks  Almost  half  of  free  blacks  in  the
United  States  in  1840  (some  170,000)  and  again  in
1860  (250,000)  lived  in  the  free  states  of  the  North.
However,  few  of  them  enjoyed
unfettered  freedom.  Most  whites
regarded  African  Americans  as
their social inferiors and confined
them to low-paying jobs. In rural
areas,  blacks  worked  as  farm
laborers  or  tenant  farmers;  in

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How were the lives of free
African Americans differ-
ent in the northern and
southern states?

