402

PART 4

  OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

and  merchant  Paul  Cuffee  (1759–1817)  acquired  a
small  fortune  from  his  business  enterprises.  More
impressive and enduring were the community institu-
tions created by free African Americans. Throughout
the  North,  these  largely  unknown  men  and  women
founded  schools,  mutual-benefit  organizations,  and
fellowship groups, often called Free African Societies.
Discriminated against by white Protestants, they formed
their own congregations and a new religious denomi-
nation — the  African  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,
headed by Bishop Richard Allen (see Chapter 8).

These institutions gave African Americans a mea-
sure of cultural autonomy, even as they marked sharp
social  divisions  among  blacks.  “Respectable”  blacks
tried through their dress, conduct, and attitude to win
the “esteem and patronage” of prominent whites — first
Federalists  and  then  Whigs  and  abolitionists — who
were  sympathetic  to  their  cause.  Those  efforts  sepa-
rated them from impoverished blacks, who distrusted
not only whites but also blacks who “acted white.”

Standing for Freedom in the South  The free black
population in the slave states numbered approximately
94,000 in 1810 and 225,000 in 1860. Most of these men
and women lived in coastal cities — Mobile, Memphis,
New Orleans — and in the Upper South. Partly because
skilled  Europeans  avoided  the  South,  free  blacks
formed the backbone of the urban artisan workforce.
African  American  carpenters,  blacksmiths,  barbers,
butchers,  and  shopkeepers  played  prominent  roles  in
the  economies  of  Baltimore,  Richmond,  Charleston,
and New Orleans. But whatever their skills, free blacks
faced many dangers. White officials often denied jury
trials  to  free  blacks  accused  of  crimes,  and  some-
times  they  forced  those  charged  with  vagrancy  back
into slavery. Some free blacks were simply kidnapped
and sold.

As a privileged minority among African Americans
in  the  South,  free  blacks  had  divided  loyalties.  To
advance  the welfare  of their families,  some distanced
themselves  from  plantation  slaves  and  assimilated
white culture and values. Indeed, mixed-race individu-
als  sometimes  joined  the  ranks  of  the  planter  class.
David Barland, one of twelve children born to a white
Mississippi planter and his black slave Elizabeth, him-
self owned no fewer than eighteen slaves. In neighbor-
ing  Louisiana,  some  free  blacks  supported  secession
because they owned slaves and were “dearly attached to
their native land.”

Such individuals were exceptions. Most free African
Americans acknowledged their ties to the great mass of
slaves, some of whom were their relatives. “We’s differ-
ent  [from  whites]  in  color,  in  talk  and  in  ’ligion  and

A Master Bridge Builder

Horace King (1807–1885) was a self-made man of color, a
rarity in the nineteenth-century South. Born a slave of mixed
European, African, and Native American (Catawba) ancestry,
King built major bridges in Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi
during the early 1840s. After winning his freedom in 1846,
he built and ran a toll bridge across the Chattahoochee River
in Alabama. During the Civil War, King worked as a contrac-
tor for the Confederacy; during Reconstruction, he served
two terms as a Republican in the Alabama House of Repre-
sentatives. Collection of the Columbus Museum, Columbus, Georgia;
Museum Purchase.

towns and cities, they toiled as domestic servants, laun-
dresses,  or  day  laborers.  Only  a  small  number  of
African Americans owned land. “You do not see one
out of a hundred . . . that can make a comfortable liv-
ing,  own  a  cow,  or  a  horse,”  a  traveler  in  New  Jersey
noted. In most states, law or custom prohibited north-
ern blacks from voting, attending public schools, or sit-
ting next to whites in churches. They could testify in
court against whites only in Massachusetts. The federal
government did not allow African Americans to work
for the postal service, claim public lands, or hold a U.S.
passport. As black activist Martin Delaney remarked in
1852: “We are slaves in the midst of freedom.”

Of the few African Americans able to make full use
of  their  talents,  several  achieved  great  distinction.
Mathematician  and  surveyor  Benjamin  Banneker
(1731–1806) published an almanac and helped lay out
the  new  capital  in  the  District  of  Columbia;  Joshua
Johnston  (1765–1832)  won  praise  for  his  portraiture;

