CHAPTER 12

  The South Expands: Slavery and Society, 1800–1860

403

An African American Clergyman

This ﬂattering portrait is one of two
paintings of African Americans by black
artist Joshua Johnson (who also went by
the surname Johnston). The son of an
enslaved black woman and a white man,
who bought his son’s freedom in 1782,
Johnson described himself in an adver-
tisement in the Baltimore Intelligence in
1798 as a “Portrait Painter . . . a self-
taught genius deriving from nature and
industry his knowledge of the Art.” White
merchant families in Maryland and Virginia
held Johnson’s work in high regard and
commissioned most of his thirty or so
extant works. Bowdoin College Museum
of Art, Brunswick, Maine. Museum Purchase,
George Otis Hamlin Fund.

beliefs,” said one. Calls by white planters in the 1840s to
re-enslave  free  African  Americans  reinforced  black
unity.  Knowing  their  own  liberty  was  not  secure  so
long as slavery existed, free blacks celebrated on August
1, the day slaves in the British West Indies won eman-
cipation, and sought a similar goal for enslaved African
Americans. As a delegate to the National Convention
of  Colored  People  in  1848  put  it,  “Our  souls  are  yet
dark under the pall of slavery.” In the rigid American
caste system, free blacks stood as symbols of hope to
enslaved African Americans and as symbols of danger
to most whites.

SUMMARY
In this chapter, we focused on the theme of an expand-
ing South. Beginning about 1800, planters carried the
system of plantation slavery from its traditional home
in  the  Upper  South  to  the  Mississippi  Valley  and

beyond. Powered by cotton, this movement westward
involved the forced migration of more than 1 million
enslaved  African  Americans  and  divided  the  planter
elite  into  aristocratic  paternalists  and  entrepreneurial
capitalists.

We also examined the character of white and black
societies in the Cotton South. After 1820, less than a
third of white families owned slaves, and another third
were yeomen farmers; propertyless tenant farmers and
laborers made up the rest. Many whites joined evan-
gelical Protestant churches, as did blacks, who infused
their  churches  with  African  modes  of  expression.
Indeed, church and family became core institutions of
African American society, providing strength and so-
lace amid the tribulations of slavery. Finally, we explored
the  initiatives  taken  by  the  free  black  population,  in
both the northern and southern states, to achieve indi-
vidual  mobility  and  to  build  community  institutions.
These  efforts  resulted  in  a  church-based  leadership
class and a black abolitionist movement.

