404

PART 4

  CHAPTER REVIEW

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

coastal trade (p. 380)
inland system (p. 380)
chattel principle (p. 381)
benevolent masters (p. 382)
republican aristocracy (p. 386)
“positive good” argument (p. 386)

gang-labor system (p. 388)
slave society (p. 388)
Alamo (p. 391)
secret ballot (p. 393)
black Protestantism (p. 395)
task system (p. 397)

Key People

Harriet Jacobs (p. 382)
James Henry Hammond (p. 384)
Stephen Austin (p. 391)
Antonio López de Santa Anna

(p. 391)

Sam Houston (p. 391)

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  Why  in  1860  did  white  southerners  remain
committed  to  the  institution  of  slavery  and  its
expansion?

2.  Based on what you have learned in Part 4, compare
and  contrast  society  in  the  American  South  with
that  in  the  North.  Was  America,  in  fact,  two  dis-
tinct societies by 1860? If not, what bonds, beliefs,
and  cultural  practices  united  Americans  across
regional boundaries? If so, what factors contributed
to the development of separate regional identities?

3.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events listed under “Identity” on the thematic time-
line on page 283, and then discuss how the end of
the Atlantic slave trade in 1807 and the subsequent
rise of the domestic slave trade affected the identity
of the African American population.

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS TIME AND PLACE  After reviewing
the  relevant  materials  in  Chapters  3,  8,  and  12,
explain how the plantation economy and the sys-
tem of slavery changed between 1720 and 1860.

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  Chapter  12  contains  a
number  of  paintings  or  photographs  of  enslaved
African  Americans.  In  your  judgment,  do  those
images,  either  individually  or  as  a  group,  capture
the reality of slave life? Explain your position while
evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of paint-
ings and photographs as historical evidence.

