CHAPTER 12

  CHAPTER REVIEW

405

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Edward Ball, Slaves in the Family (1998). Recounts
Ball’s ancestors’ ownership of slaves, their illicit sexual
unions, and the family’s diverse racial identity.

Ira Berlin, Generations of Captivity (2003). Traces the
history of slavery in the United States.

Charlene M. Boyer Lewis, Ladies and Gentlemen on
Display (2001). Explores the lives of the planter class.

Stephanie McCurry, Masters of Small Worlds (1995).
Evokes the patriarchal lives of yeomen families.

Adam Rothman, Slave Country: American Expansion
and the Origins of the Deep South (2005). Analyzes the
changing character of slavery and African American
society.

For primary documents on the black Christian
church, consult docsouth.unc.edu/church/index
.html.

TIMELINE

Ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates
and then identify the links among related events.

1810s

(cid:116) Africans from Congo region inﬂuence black culture for decades

(cid:116) Natural increase produces surplus of slaves in Old South

(cid:116) Domestic slave trade expands, disrupting black family life

(cid:116) Louisiana becomes a state, and its sugar output increases

(cid:116) Mississippi becomes a state; Alabama follows (1819)

1812

1817

1820s

(cid:116) Free black population increases in North and South

(cid:116) Entrepreneurial planters in Cotton South turn to gang labor

(cid:116) Southern Methodists and Baptists become socially conservative

(cid:116) African Americans increasingly adopt Christian beliefs

1830s

(cid:116) Gentry in Old South adopt paternalistic ideology and argue that slavery is a “positive good”

(cid:116) Boom in cotton production

(cid:116) Percentage of slave-owning white families falls

(cid:116) Yeomen farm families retreat to hill country

(cid:116) Lawyers become inﬂuential in southern politics

1840s

(cid:116) Southern Whigs advocate economic diversiﬁcation

(cid:116) Gradual emancipation completed in North

1850s

(cid:116) Cotton prices and production increase

(cid:116) Slave prices rise

(cid:116) Southern states subsidize railroads, but industry remains limited

KEY TURNING POINTS: Using the five entries in the timeline for the 1830s, write an essay that
describes the economy, society, and polity of the South in that decade and that analyzes the sig-
nificance of the decade’s developments in the evolution of the region between 1800 and 1860.

