Creating and
Preserving a
Continental Nation
1844–1877

Between 1844 and 1877, the United States became a continental nation by

winning  three  wars  and  creating  a  stronger  central  government.  This

energetic  process  of  national  expansion  and  purposeful  state  building

spanned three decades and three periods often treated as distinct: ante-

bellum America, the Civil War, and Reconstruction. In fact, these decades

constitute  a  single,  distinct  period  of  American  political  and  constitu-

tional development that produced a consolidated national republic.

This  era  of  state  building  began  in  the  1840s  as  the  United  States

expanded to the Pacific through a diplomatic deal with Great Britain and

a war of conquest against Mexico. However, geographic expansion sharp-

ened the conflict between free and slave states and led eventually to the

secession of the South in 1861. The Union government defeated the seces-

sionists  in  a  bloody  Civil  War  and  reconstructed  the  Union  under  the

ideals  of  the  Republican  Party.  Freed  from  slavery,  millions  of  African

Americans fought for better pay and equal citizenship rights. Under pres-

sure  to  assimilate,  most  Native  Americans  adapted  selectively  while

maintaining tribal ties and traditional lifeways. Subsequently, the national

government  promoted  Euro-American  settlement  of  the  West  by  con-

quering Indian peoples and confining them to reservations.

The story of these transforming events focuses on three sets of his-

torical issues:

5P A R T

C H A P T E R 13
Expansion, War,
and Sectional Crisis,
1844–1860

C H A P T E R 14
Two Societies at War,
1861–1865

C H A P T E R 15
Reconstruction,
1865–1877

C H A P T E R 16
Conquering a
Continent, 1854–1890

406

