Continental Empire and
Cultural Conflict

Sectional Tensions, Political
Divisions, and Civil War

A romantic spirit of geographic expansion grew
during the 1840s, prompting southerners to demand
the annexation of Texas and midwesterners to favor
the acquisition of Oregon. Northeastern railroad
entrepreneurs championed western settlement, as
did merchants eager to trade across the Paciﬁc. The
quest for western lands sparked seizure of the Mexican
provinces of New Mexico and California and purchase
of Russian claims to Alaska. We analyze these events
in Chapter 13.

This process of expansion and state building,
combined with the arrival of millions of immigrants,
created new systems of racial and ethnic conﬂict. In
the East, Irish Catholics and German-speaking migrants
organized politically to protect their churches, saloons,
and cultural identity, prompting a sharp reaction
among native-born Protestants. In the West, the U.S.
government fought wars against Cheyennes, Sioux,
and Comanches on the Great Plains as it sought to
integrate the region into the national economy. In the
conquered Mexican territories, newly arriving whites
jostled uneasily with Hispanic residents and despised
Chinese immigrants. In an era of rapid economic
development, western disputes often centered on
access to land, jobs, and natural resources. For these
conﬂicts, see Chapters 13 and 16.

The Mexican War prompted a decade-long debate over
the expansion of slavery into the newly acquired lands.
This bitter struggle led to the Compromise of 1850, a
complex legislative agreement that won little support
either in the North or in the South and divided the
Whig Party. As southern Whigs became Democrats
and northern Whigs turned into Republicans or
Know-Nothings, the parties split along sectional
lines. The Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 began a
downward spiral of political conﬂict that ended in
the election of Republican Abraham Lincoln in 1860
and the secession of thirteen southern states. Chap-
ter 13 details this breakdown of the political system.
In the long Civil War that followed, the military
forces of the North and South were at ﬁrst evenly
matched. However, the North’s superior ﬁnancial
and industrial resources gradually gave it the advan-
tage, as did Lincoln’s proclamation of freedom for
slaves in 1863. Emancipation undermined European
support for the secessionists and added thousands of
African Americans to the northern armies. Union forces
swept across the South and ended the war, which left
a legacy of half-won freedom for blacks and decades
of bitter animosity between northern and southern
whites. The Civil War is the focus of Chapter 14.

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

407

