Creating and
Preserving a
Continental Nation
1844–1877

National Power and Consolidation

Thematic Understanding

This timeline arranges some of the important

events of this period into themes. Consider

the events listed under each of the five

themes. Which set of events seems the

most important? The least important? The

theme of “Politics and Power” begins with a

reference to sectional conflict and concludes

with the section-driven Compromise of 1877.

Based on other entries in this theme and your

reading in Chapters 13, 14, and 15, explain

how the nature of sectionalism and the power

of the various sections changed between 1844

and 1877.  >

The Civil War increased national authority. Three
Republican-sponsored constitutional amendments
limited the powers of the states and imposed deﬁni-
tions of citizenship — prohibiting slavery, mandating
suffrage for black men, and forbidding state action
that denied people equal protection under the law.
The U.S. Army remained a signiﬁcant force, enforcing
Reconstruction in the South as late as 1877, while
suppressing Indian uprisings and extending national
control in the West.

The Civil War created a powerful American state, as
the Union government mobilized millions of men and
billions of dollars. It created a modern ﬁscal system,
an elaborate network of national banks, and — for the
ﬁrst time in American history — a signiﬁcant national
bureaucracy. Inspired by Whig ideology, Republican-
run Congresses intervened forcefully to integrate
the national economy and promote industrialization,
granting subsidies to railroad companies, protecting
industries and workers through protective tariffs, and
distributing western lands to farmers and cattlemen.
In the 1850s and 1860s, U.S. ofﬁcials also intervened
aggressively in Japan and then built coaling stations
that enabled U.S. steamships to carry products to Asia
and bring Chinese workers to the United States. The
nation’s dynamic postwar economy had set the nation
on a course toward global power. Chapters 15 and 16
discuss all of these events.

408

