Expansion, War, and
Sectional Crisis
1844–1860

The expansionist surge of the 1840s

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
What were the causes of the Mexi-
can  War,  and  in  what  ways  did  it
bring about a growing sectional cri-
sis during the 1850s?

had  deep roots. Since the nation’s
founding  in  1776,  visionaries  con-
ceived its future both as a republic and as
an  empire,  and  they  predicted  a  glorious
expansion across the continent. “It belongs
of right to the United States to regulate the future destiny of North America,” declared
the New-York Evening Post in 1803. Politicians soon took up the refrain. “Our natural
boundary is the Paciﬁc Ocean,” asserted Massachusetts congressman Francis Baylies in
1823. “The swelling tide of our population must and will roll on until that mighty ocean
interposes  its  waters.”  However,  the  creation  of  a  continental  republic  was  far  from
inevitable.  It  would  require  a  revolution  in  transportation — canals  and  railways — to
access the nation’s fertile core in the vast Mississippi River basin and a growing popula-
tion  and  dynamic  economy  to  exploit  its  riches.  By  the  1840s,  all  those  prerequisites
were in place.

Other obstacles remained. Well-armed Indian peoples controlled the Great Plains,
Mexico held sovereignty over Texas and the lands west of the Rocky Mountains, and
Great Britain laid claim to the Oregon Country. To extend the American republic would
involve new Indian wars and possibly armed conﬂict with Great Britain and with Mexico
(and perhaps France, its main creditor). An ardent imperialist, President James Polk will-
ingly assumed those risks. “I would meet the war which either England or France . . . might
wage and ﬁght until the last man,” he told Secretary of State James Buchanan in 1846.
Polk’s aggressive expansionism sparked ﬁghting abroad and conﬂict at home. A war
with Mexico intended to be “brief, cheap, and bloodless” became “long, costly, and
sanguinary,”  complained  Senator  Thomas  Hart  Benton  of  Missouri.  Even  Polk’s  great
territorial acquisitions — New Mexico, California, the Oregon Country — proved double-
edged  by  reigniting  a  bitter  debate  over  slavery.  Northerners  vowed  to  prevent  the
expansion of bound labor into the newly acquired territories, prompting southerners to
threaten secession from the Union. Rhetoric spiraled downward into violence, as white
and black abolitionists attacked slave catchers in the North and secessionists harassed
Union supporters in the South. When Massachusetts senator Charles Sumner accused
his South Carolina colleague Andrew P. Butler of taking “the harlot slavery” as his mis-
tress, a southern congressman beat Sumner unconscious with a walking cane. As this
violence shook Washington in 1856, proslavery migrants fought armed New England
abolitionists in the Kansas Territory. Passion had replaced compromise as the hallmark of
American political life.

13

C H A P T E R

MANIFEST DESTINY:
SOUTH AND NORTH
The Push to the Pacific

The Plains Indians

The Fateful Election of 1844

WAR, EXPANSION, AND
SLAVERY, 1846–1850
The War with Mexico,

1846–1848

A Divisive Victory

California Gold and Racial

Warfare

1850: Crisis and Compromise

THE END OF THE
SECOND PARTY SYSTEM,
1850–1858

Resistance to the Fugitive

Slave Act

The Whigs Disintegrate and

New Parties Rise

Buchanan’s Failed Presidency

ABRAHAM LINCOLN
AND THE REPUBLICAN
TRIUMPH, 1858–1860
Lincoln’s Political Career

The Union Under Siege

410

