412

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

Manifest Destiny:
South and North
The upsurge in violence reflected a generational shift in
culture and politics. The Missouri crisis of 1819–1822
(Chapter 8) had frightened the nation’s leaders. For the
next two decades, the professional politicians who ran
the Second Party System avoided policies, such as the
annexation of the slaveholding Republic of Texas, that
would prompt regional strife. Then, during the 1840s,
many citizens embraced an ideology of expansion and
proclaimed  a  God-given  duty  to  extend  American
republicanism to the Pacific Ocean. But whose repub-
lican  institutions:  the  hierarchical  slave  system  of
the  South,  or  the  more  egalitarian,  reform-minded,
capitalist-managed society of the North and Midwest?
Or both? Ultimately, the failure to find a political solu-
tion to this question would rip the nation apart.

The Push to the Pacific
As expansionists developed continental ambitions, the
term Manifest Destiny captured those dreams. John L.
O’Sullivan,  editor  of  the  Democratic  Review,  coined
the phrase in 1845: “Our manifest destiny is to over-
spread  the  continent  allotted  by  Providence  for  the
free  development  of  our  yearly  multiplying  millions.”
Underlying  the  rhetoric  of  Manifest  Destiny  was  a

sense of Anglo-American cultural and racial superior-
ity:  the  “inferior”  peoples  who  lived  in  the  Far
West — Native  Americans  and  Mexicans — would  be
subjected  to  American  dominion,  taught  republican-
ism, and converted to Protestantism.

Oregon  Land-hungry  farmers  of  the  Ohio  River
Valley  had  already  cast  their  eyes  toward  the  fertile
lands  of  the  Oregon  Country,  a  region  that  stretched
along the Pacific coast between the Mexican province
of California and Russian settlements in Alaska. Since
1818,  a  British-American  agreement  had  allowed
settlement by people from both nations. The British-run
Hudson’s Bay Company developed a lucrative fur busi-
ness north of the Columbia River, while Methodist mis-
sionaries and a few hundred American farmers settled
to the south, in the Willamette Valley (Map 13.1).

In  1842,  American  interest  in  Oregon  increased
dramatically. The U.S. Navy published a glowing report
of fine harbors in the Puget Sound, which New England
merchants  trading  with  China  were  already  using.
Simultaneously, a party of one hundred farmers jour-
neyed  along  the  Oregon  Trail,  which  fur  traders  and
explorers  had  blazed  from  Independence,  Missouri,
across  the  Great  Plains  and  the  Rocky  Mountains
(Map  13.2). Their letters  from  Oregon  told  of  a  mild
climate and rich soil.

“Oregon fever” suddenly raged. A thousand men,
women,  and  children — with  a  hundred  wagons  and

RUSSIAN
ALASKA

Fort Simpson

.
R
r
e
s
a
r
F

CO

NTINEN
TAL DIVIDE

0

0

OREGON

Claimed by Britain and
the United States
United States claim

Fort
Settlement

125

250 miles

125

250 kilometers

BRITISH
AMERICA

British-American Boundary, 1846

MAP 13.1
Territorial Conflict in Oregon, 1819–1846

As thousands of American settlers poured into
the Oregon Country in the early 1840s, British
authorities tried to keep them south of the
Columbia River. However, the migrants — and
fervent expansionists — asserted that Americans
could settle anywhere in the territory, raising
the prospect of armed conﬂict. In 1846, British
and American diplomats resolved the dispute by
dividing most of the region at the forty-ninth
parallel while giving both nations access to ﬁne
harbors (Vancouver and Seattle) through the Strait
of Juan de Fuca.

Vancouver
Island

Fort Victoria

PACIFIC
OCEAN

Portland

WILLAMETTE
VALLEY

COUNTRY

Columbia R.
O
R
E
G
O

Willamette R.

Snake R.

N TRAIL
Spanish-American Boundary, 1819

Fort Hall

MEXICO

Missouri R.

W

N

S

E

UNITED
STATES

