CHAPTER 13

  Expansion, War, and Sectional Crisis, 1844–1860

413

Settling Oregon

Americans quickly populated the Far West and re-created there the small-town life of the eastern
states. As early as 1845, as this drawing by a British military ofﬁcer shows, Oregon City boasted a
steepled church, several large merchandise warehouses, and several dozen houses. On the riverbank
opposite the town stand several Native Americans, who had a very different way of life and would be
steadily pushed off the lands of their ancestors. Library of Congress.

five thousand oxen and cattle — gathered in Indepen-
dence  in  April  1843.  As  the  spring  mud  dried,  they
began their six-month trek, hoping to miss the winter
snows.  Another  5,000  settlers,  mostly  yeomen  farm
families  from  the  southern  border  states  (Missouri,
Kentucky,  and  Tennessee),  set  out  over  the  next  two
years.  These  pioneers  overcame  floods,  dust  storms,
livestock  deaths,  and  a  few  armed  encounters  with
native  peoples  before  reaching  Oregon,  a  journey  of
2,000 miles.

By 1860, about 250,000 Americans had braved the
Oregon Trail, with 65,000 heading for Oregon, 185,000
to California, and others staying in Wyoming, Idaho,
and Montana. More than 34,000 migrants died, mostly
from  disease  and  exposure;  fewer  than  500  deaths
resulted  from  Indian  attacks.  The  walking  migrants
wore  paths  3  feet  deep,  and  their  wagons  carved
5-foot  ruts  across  sandstone  formations  in  southern
Wyoming — tracks  that  are  visible  today.  Women
found the trail especially difficult; in addition to their
usual chores and the new work of driving wagons and
animals, they lacked the support of female kin and the

security  of  their  domestic  space.
About  2,500  women  endured
pregnancy  or  gave  birth  during
the  long  journey,  and  some  did
not survive. “There was a woman
died in this train yesterday,” Jane
Gould  Tortillott  noted  in  her
diary.  “She  left  six  children,  one
of them only two days old.”

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Did the idea of Mani-
fest Destiny actually
cause events, such as the
political support for terri-
torial expansion, or simply
justify actions taken for
other reasons?

The 10,000 migrants who made it to Oregon in the
1840s  mostly  settled  in  the  Willamette  Valley.  Many
families  squatted  on  640  acres  and  hoped  Congress
would legalize their claims so that they could sell sur-
plus acreage to new migrants. The settlers quickly cre-
ated  a  race-  and  gender-defined  polity  by  restricting
voting to a “free male descendant of a white man.”

California  About  3,000  other  early  pioneers  ended
up in the Mexican province of California. They left the
Oregon Trail along the Snake River, trudged down the
California Trail, and mostly settled in the interior along
the Sacramento River, where there were few Mexicans.

