414

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

N

E

W

S

WASHINGTON
TERRITORY

Astoria

(cid:9)
Ft. Vancouver

Columbia R.
ette R.
Willa

m

OREGON

Blackfeet

C
O
N
TI
N
E
N
T
A
L

R
O
C
K
Y

Flatheads

Snake R.

(cid:9)

Ft. Boise

Gros Ventres
(cid:9)

Missouri R.

Crows

NEBRASKA
TERRITORY

CANADA

Crees

95th Meridian

Assiniboines

Ft. Union

Hidatsas
Mandans

UNORG.
TERR.

Arikaras

MINN.

Ft. Hall

(cid:9)

Salt
Lake
City

UTAH
TERR.

M
O
(cid:9)
U
N
T

South
Pass

DIVID
E

Ft.
Bridger

Cheyennes
(cid:9)

Arapahoes

Shoshones

Cheyennes

Lakotas

G
R
E
A
T
Ft. Laramie
Pawnees
P
L
A
I
N
S

Platte R.

Mississippi R.

WIS.

Omahas
Iowas

IOWA

Ft.
Kearney

(cid:9)
Kansas

(cid:9)

.

R
o
t
n
e
m
a
r
c
a
S

SIE
R
R

A               N

Sacramento

San Francisco

Carson City

GREAT
BASIN

E
V
A
D
A

San
Joaquin R.

Monterey

Utes

A

Colorado R.

I

N

Santa Barbara

Los Angeles

CALIF.

S

NEW MEXICO
TERRITORY

San Diego

P A C I F I C
O C E A N

(cid:9)
Ft. Yuma

El Paso

KANS. TERR.

(cid:9)
Bent’s
Fort

(cid:9)
Ft. Dodge

Kiowas

Osages

Arkansas R.

Comanches

Apaches

Santa Fe
Albuquerque

Red R.

UNORG.
TERR.
Wichitas

Comanches

Jumanos

TEXAS

Rio Grande

M E X I C O

Nauvoo
ILL.

St. Joseph
Ft. Leavenworth

Independence

MO.

St.
Louis

Springfield

ARK.

(cid:9)
Ft. Smith

Caddos

LA.

Gulf of
Me x ico

Spanish Trail
Santa Fe Trail
Oregon Trail
Mormon Trail
California Trail
Pony Express Mail Route
Butterfield Overland Mail Route
Camino Real
United States fort

0

0

(cid:9)

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

MAP 13.2
The Great Plains: Settler Trails, Indian Raiders, and Traders

By the 1850s, the Mormon, Oregon, and Santa Fe trails ran across “Indian Country,” the semiarid,
buffalo-ﬁlled Great Plains west of the 95th meridian, and then through the Rocky Mountains. Tens
of thousands of Americans set out on these trails to found new communities in Utah, Oregon,
New Mexico, and California. This mass migration exposed sedentary Indian peoples to American
diseases, guns, and manufactures. However, raids by Comanches and Sioux affected their lives even
more signiﬁcantly, as did the Euro-American traders who provided a ready market for Indian horses
and mules, dried meat, and buffalo skins.

A  remote  outpost  of  Spain’s  American  empire,  Cali-
fornia  had  few  nonnative  residents  until  the  1770s,
when Spanish authorities built a chain of forts and reli-
gious missions along the Pacific coast. When Mexico
achieved  independence  in  1821,  its  government  took

over the Franciscan-run missions and freed the 20,000
Indians  whom  the  monks  had  persuaded  or  coerced
into working on them. Some mission Indians rejoined
their  tribes,  but  many  intermarried  with  mestizos
(Mexicans  of  mixed  Spanish  and  Indian  ancestry).

