CHAPTER 13

  Expansion, War, and Sectional Crisis, 1844–1860

415

William Henry Jackson, California Crossing, South Platte River, detail, 1867

The South Platte River was wide (stretching from the foreground to the low bluff in the middle of the picture)
but shallow, allowing relatively easy passage for the migrants’ cattle and covered wagons. Wagon trains
followed the course of the various branches of the Platte River for more than 300 miles across the Great
Plains. During the late spring and early summer, wagons often stretched as far as the eye could see. National
Park Service/Picture Research Consultants & Archives.

They worked on huge ranches — the 450 estates created
by Mexican officials and bestowed primarily on their
families  and  political  allies.  The  owners  of  these
vast properties (averaging 19,000 acres) mostly raised
Spanish cattle, prized for their hides and tallow.

The ranches soon linked California to the American
economy. New England merchants dispatched dozens
of agents to buy leather for the booming Massachusetts
boot and shoe industry and tallow to make soap and
candles.  Many  agents  married  the  daughters  of  the
elite Mexican ranchers — the Californios — and adopted
their  manners,  attitudes,  and  Catholic  religion.  A
crucial  exception  was  Thomas  Oliver  Larkin,  a  suc-
cessful  merchant  in  the  coastal  town  of  Monterey.
Although Larkin worked closely with Mexican politi-
cians and landowners, he remained strongly American
in outlook.

Like Larkin, the American migrants in the Sacra-
mento  River  Valley  did  not  assimilate  into  Mexican
society. Some hoped to emulate the Americans in Texas

by  colonizing  the  country  and  then  seeking  annexa-
tion. However, in the early 1840s, these settlers num-
bered only about 1,000, far outnumbered by the 7,000
Mexicans who lived along the coast.

The Plains Indians
As  the  Pacific-bound  wagon  trains  rumbled  across
Nebraska  along  the  broad  Platte  River,  the  migrants
encountered  the  unique  ecology  of  the  Great  Plains.
A  vast  sea  of  wild  grasses  stretched  from  Texas  to
Saskatchewan in Canada, and west from the Missouri
River to the Rocky Mountains. Tall grasses flourished
in  the  eastern  regions  of  the  future  states  of  Kansas,
Nebraska,  and  the  Dakotas,  where  there  was  ample
rainfall. To the west, in the semiarid region beyond the
100th meridian, the migrants found short grasses that
sustained  a  rich  wildlife  dominated  by  buffalo  and
grazing  antelopes.  Nomadic  buffalo-hunting  Indian
peoples roamed the western plains, while the eastern

