416

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

river  valleys  were  home  to  semisedentary  tribes  and,
since  the  1830s,  the  Indian  peoples  whom  Andrew
Jackson had “removed” to the west. A line of military
forts — stretching from Fort Jesup in Louisiana to Fort
Snelling,  then  in  the  Wisconsin  Territory — policed
the  boundary  between  white  settlements  and  what
Congress  in  1834  designated  as  Permanent  Indian
Territory.

For centuries, the Indians who lived on the eastern
edge  of  the  plains,  such  as  the  Pawnees  and  the
Mandans on the Upper Missouri River, subsisted pri-
marily  on  corn  and  beans,  supplemented  by  buffalo
meat. They hunted buffalo on foot, driving them over
cliffs  or  into  canyons  for  the  kill.  To  the  south,  the
nomadic  Apaches  acquired  horses  from  Spanish  set-
tlers  in  New  Mexico  and  ranged  widely  across  the
plains.  The  Comanches,  who  migrated  down  the
Arkansas  River  from  the  Rocky  Mountains  around
1750, developed both a horse-based culture and impe-
rial ambitions. Skilled buffalo hunters and fierce war-
riors, the Comanches slowly pushed the Apaches to the
southern edge of the plains. They also raided Spanish
settlements  in  New  Mexico,  incorporating  captured
women and children into their society.

After  1800,  the  Comanches  gradually  built  up  a
pastoral  economy,  raising  horses  and  mules  and  sell-
ing  them  to  northern  Indian  peoples  and  to  Euro-
American  farmers  in  Missouri  and  Arkansas.  Many
Comanche families owned thirty to thirty-five horses
or  mules,  far  more  than  the  five  or  six  required  for
hunting buffalo and fighting neighboring peoples. The
Comanches also exchanged goods with merchants and
travelers  along  the  Santa  Fe  Trail,  which cut  through
their  territory  as  it  connected  Missouri  and  New
Mexico. By the early 1840s, goods worth nearly $1 mil-
lion moved along the trail each year.

By the 1830s, the Kiowas, Cheyennes, and Arapahos
had  also  adopted  this  horse  culture  and,  allied  with
the  Comanches,  dominated  the  plains  between  the
Arkansas  and  Red  rivers.  The  new  culture  brought
sharper social divisions. Some Kiowa men owned hun-
dreds of horses and had several “chore wives” and cap-
tive  children  who  worked  for  them.  Poor  men,  who
owned  only  a  few  horses,  had  difficulty  finding  mar-
riage partners and often had to work for their wealthy
kinsmen.

While  European  horses  made  Plains  Indians
wealthier  and  more  mobile,  European  diseases  and

Comanches Meeting the
Dragoons, 1830s

In the 1830s, when artist George
Catlin accompanied the dragoons
of the U.S. Army into Indian
Territory, the Comanches were
masters of the southern plains.
They hunted buffalo, raised horses
and mules for sale, and used their
skills as horsemen to dominate
other Indian peoples and control
the passage of Americans along
the Santa Fe Trail. Smithsonian
American Art Museum, Washington,
DC/Art Resource, NY.

