CHAPTER 13

  Expansion, War, and Sectional Crisis, 1844–1860

417

guns thinned their ranks. A devastating smallpox epi-
demic  spread  northward  from  New  Spain  in  1779–
1781 and killed half of the Plains peoples. Twenty years
later, another smallpox outbreak left dozens of deserted
villages along the Missouri River. Smallpox struck the
northern plains again from 1837 to 1840, killing half of
the Assiniboines and Blackfeet and nearly a third of the
Crows,  Pawnees,  and  Cheyennes.  “If  I  could  see  this
thing, if I knew where it came from, I would go there
and fight it,” exclaimed a distressed Cheyenne warrior.
European  weapons  also  altered  the  geography  of
native  peoples.  Around  1750,  the  Crees  and  Assini-
boines, who lived on the far northern plains, acquired
guns  by  trading  wolf  pelts  and  beaver  skins  to  the
British-run Hudson’s Bay Company. Once armed, they
drove the Blackfoot peoples westward into the Rocky
Mountains and took control of the Saskatchewan and
Upper  Missouri  River  basins.  When  the  Blackfeet
obtained guns and horses around 1800, they emerged
from  the  mountains  and  pushed  the  Shoshones  and
Crows  to  the  south.  Because  horses  could  not  easily
find winter forage in the snow-filled plains north of the
Platte  River,  Blackfoot  families  kept  only  five  to  ten
horses and remained hunters rather than pastoralists.

The  powerful  Lakota  Sioux,  who  acquired  guns
and ammunition from French, Spanish, and American
traders along the Missouri River, also remained buffalo
hunters.  A  nomadic  war-prone  people  who  lived  in
small  groups,  the  Lakotas  largely  avoided  major  epi-
demics. They kept some sedentary peoples, such as the
Arikaras,  in  subjection  and  raided  others  for  their
crops and horses. By the 1830s, the Lakotas were the
dominant tribe on the central as well as the northern
plains. “Those lands once belonged to the Kiowas and
the Crows,” boasted the Oglala Sioux chief Black Hawk,
“but we whipped those nations out of them, and in this
we  did  what  the  white  men  do  when  they  want  the
lands of the Indians.”

The Sioux’s prosperity also came at the expense of
the  buffalo,  which  provided  them  with  a  diet  rich  in
protein and with hides and robes to sell. The number of
hides and robes shipped down the Missouri River each
year by the American Fur Company and the Missouri
Fur  Company  increased  from  3,000  in  the  1820s,  to
45,000 in the 1830s, and to 90,000 annually after 1840.
North of the Missouri, the story was much the same.
The  24,000  Indians  of  that  region — Blackfeet,  Crees,
and Assiniboines — annually killed about 160,000 buf-
falo.  The  women  dried  the  meat  to  feed  their  people
and to sell to white traders and soldiers. The women
also  undertook  the  arduous  work  of  skinning  and
tanning  the  hides,  which  they  fashioned  into  tepees,

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
Why did some Great Plains
peoples ﬂourish between
1750 and 1860 while
others did not?

buffalo  robes,  and  sleeping  cov-
ers.  Over  time,  Indian  hunters
increased the kill and traded sur-
plus  hides  and  robes — about
40,000 annually by the 1840s — for
pots,  knives,  guns,  and  other
Euro-American manufactures. As
among the Kiowas, trade increased social divisions. “It
is  a  fine  sight,”  a  traveler  noted  around  1850,  “to  see
one  of  those  big  men  among  the  Blackfeet,  who  has
two or three lodges, five or six wives, twenty or thirty
children, fifty to a hundred head of horses; for his trade
amounts to upward of $2,000 per year.”

Although the Blackfeet, Kiowas, and Lakotas con-
tributed  buffalo  hides  to  the  national  economy,  they
did not fully grasp their market value as winter clothes,
leather accessories, and industrial drive belts. Conse-
quently, they could not demand the best price. More-
over,  the  increasing  size  of  the  kill  diminished  the
buffalo  herds.  Between  1820  and  1870,  the  northern
herd shrank from 5 million to less than 2 million. When
the  Assiniboines’  cultural  hero  Inkton’mi  had  taught
his people how to kill the buffalo, he told them, “The
buffalo will live as long as your people. There will be no
end of them until the end of time.” Meant as a perpetual
guarantee,  by  the  1860s  Inkton’mi’s  words  prefigured
the  end  of  time — the  demise  of  traditional  buffalo
hunting and, perhaps, of the Assiniboines as well.

The Fateful Election of 1844
The  election  of  1844  changed  the  American  govern-
ment’s  policy  toward  the  Great  Plains,  the  Far  West,
and Texas. Since 1836, southern leaders had supported
the annexation of Texas, but cautious party politicians,
pressured by northerners who opposed the expansion
of  slavery,  had  rebuffed  them  (Chapter  12).  Now
rumors  swirled  that  Great  Britain  was  encouraging
Texas  to  remain  independent;  wanted  California  as
payment for the Mexican debts owed to British inves-
tors;  and  had  designs  on  Spanish  Cuba,  which  some
slave  owners  wanted  to  add  to  the  United  States.  To
thwart such imagined schemes, southern expansionists
demanded the immediate annexation of Texas.

At  this  crucial  juncture,  Oregon  fever  altered  the
political  landscape  in  the  North.  In  1843,  Americans
in  the  Ohio  River  Valley  and  the  Great  Lakes  states
organized “Oregon conventions,” and Democratic and
Whig  politicians  alike  called  for  American  sover-
eignty over the entire Oregon Country, from Spanish
California  to  Russian  Alaska  (which  began  at  54°40'
north latitude). With northerners demanding Oregon,

