418

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

President John Tyler, a proslavery zealot, called for the
annexation of Texas. Disowned by the Whigs because
he  thwarted  Henry  Clay’s  nationalist  economic  pro-
gram,  Tyler  hoped  to  win  reelection  in  1844  as  a
Democrat. To curry favor among northern expansion-
ists, Tyler supported claims to all of Oregon.

house,  and  Texas  became  the  twenty-eighth  state  in
December  1845.  Polk’s  strategy  of  linking  Texas  and
Oregon had put him in the White House and Texas in
the Union. Shortly, it would make the expansion of the
South — and its system of slavery — the central topic of
American politics.

In April 1844, Tyler and John C. Calhoun, his pro-
slavery,  expansionist-minded  secretary  of  state,  sent
the Senate a treaty to bring Texas
into  the  Union.  How ever,  the
two  major  presidential  hopefuls,
Democrat Martin Van Buren and
Whig Henry Clay, opposed Tyler’s
initiative.  Fearful  of  raising  the
issue  of  slavery,  they  persuaded
the Senate to reject the treaty.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Why did party politi-
cians initially oppose the
annexation of Texas, and
how did this view change
during the election of
1844?

Nonetheless,  expansion  into
Texas  and  Oregon  became  the
central  issue  in  the  election  of  1844.  Most  southern
Democrats  favored  Texas  annexation  and  refused  to
support Van Buren’s candidacy. The party also passed
over  Tyler,  whom  they  did  not  trust.  Instead,  the
Democrats  selected  Governor  James  K.  Polk  of  Ten-
nessee,  a  slave  owner  and  an  avowed  expansionist.
Known as “Young Hickory” because he was a protégé
of Andrew Jackson, Polk shared his mentor’s iron will,
boundless  ambition,  and  determination  to  open  up
lands  for  American  settlement.  Accepting  the  false
claim  in  the  Democratic  Party  platform  that  both
areas already belonged to the United States, Polk cam-
paigned  for  the  “Re-occupation  of  Oregon  and  the
Re-annexation  of  Texas.”  He  insisted  that  the  United
States defy British claims and occupy “the whole of the
territory of Oregon” to the Alaskan border. “Fifty-four
forty or fight!” became his jingoistic cry.

The  Whigs  nominated  Henry  Clay,  who  again
advocated his American System of high tariffs, internal
improvements,  and  national  banking.  Clay  initially
dodged the issue of Texas but, seeking southern votes,
ultimately  supported  annexation.  Northern  Whigs
who opposed the admission of a new slave state refused
to  vote  for  Clay  and  cast  their  ballots  for  James  G.
Birney of the Liberty Party (Chapter 11). Birney gar-
nered less than 3 percent of the national vote but took
enough  Whig  votes  in  New  York  to  cost  Clay  that
state — and the presidency.

Following  Polk’s  narrow  victory,  congressional
Democrats  called  for  immediate  Texas  statehood.
However,  they  lacked  the  two-thirds  majority  in  the
Senate needed to ratify a treaty of annexation. So the
Democrats admitted Texas using a joint resolution of
Congress, which required just a majority vote in each

War, Expansion, and Slavery,
1846–1850
The acquisition of Texas whetted Polk’s appetite for the
Mexican lands between Texas and the Pacific Ocean. If
necessary, he was ready to go to war for them. What he
and  many  Democrats  consciously  ignored  was  the
domestic crisis that a war of conquest to expand slav-
ery would unleash.

The War with Mexico, 1846–1848
Since gaining independence in 1821, Mexico had not
prospered.  Its  civil  wars  and  political  instability  pro-
duced  a  stagnant  economy,  a  weak  government,  and
modest tax revenues, which a bloated bureaucracy and
debt payments to European bankers quickly devoured.
Although the distant northern provinces of California
and New Mexico remained undeveloped and sparsely
settled,  with  a  Spanish-speaking  population  of  only
75,000  in  1840,  Mexican  officials  vowed  to  preserve
their nation’s historic boundaries. When its breakaway
province  of  Texas  prepared  to  join  the  American
Union,  Mexico  suspended  diplomatic  relations  with
the United States.

Polk’s  Expansionist  Program  President  Polk  now
moved  quickly  to  acquire  Mexico’s  other  northern
provinces.  He  hoped  to  foment  a  revolution  in
California that, like the 1836 rebellion in Texas, would
lead to annexation. In October 1845, Secretary of State
James Buchanan told merchant Thomas Oliver Larkin,
now  the  U.S.  consul  for  the  Mexican  province,  to
encourage  influential  Californios  to  seek  indepen-
dence and union with the United States. To add mili-
tary  muscle  to  this  scheme,  Polk  ordered  American
naval  commanders  to  seize  San  Francisco  Bay  and
California’s coastal towns in case of war with Mexico.
The president also instructed the War Department to
dispatch Captain John C. Frémont and an “exploring”
party of soldiers into Mexican territory. By December
1845,  Frémont’s  force  had  reached  California’s  Sacra-
mento River Valley.

