CHAPTER 13

  Expansion, War, and Sectional Crisis, 1844–1860

419

With these preparations in place, Polk launched a
secret  diplomatic  initiative:  he  sent  Louisiana  con-
gressman John Slidell to Mexico, telling him to secure
the  Rio  Grande  boundary  for  Texas  and  to  buy  the
provinces of California and New Mexico for $30 mil-
lion. However, Mexican officials refused to meet with
Slidell.

Events  now  moved  quickly  toward  war.  Polk
ordered  General  Zachary  Taylor  and  an  American
army  of  2,000  soldiers  to  occupy  disputed  lands
between  the  Nueces  River  (the  historic  southern
boundary of Spanish Texas) and the Rio Grande, which
the  Republic of  Texas  had  claimed  as  its  border  with
Mexico.  “We  were  sent  to  provoke  a  fight,”  recalled
Ulysses  S.  Grant,  then  a  young  officer  serving  with
Taylor, “but it was essential that Mexico should com-
mence  it.”  When  the  armies  clashed  near  the  Rio
Grande in May 1846, Polk delivered the war message
he  had  drafted  long  before.  Taking  liberties  with  the
truth, the president declared that Mexico “has passed
the boundary of the United States, has invaded our ter-
ritory, and shed American blood upon the American

soil.”  Ignoring  pleas  by  some  Whigs  for  a  negotiated
settlement,  an  overwhelming  majority  in  Congress
voted for war — a decision greeted with great popular
acclaim.  To  avoid  a  simultaneous  war  with  Britain,
Polk retreated from his demand for “fifty-four forty or
fight”  and  in  June  1846  accepted  British  terms  that
divided the Oregon Country at the forty-ninth parallel.

American  Military  Successes  American  forces  in
Texas  quickly  established  their  military  superiority.
Zachary Taylor’s army crossed the Rio Grande; occu-
pied the Mexican city of Matamoros; and, after a fierce
six-day  battle  in  September  1846,  took  the  interior
Mexican town of Monterrey. Two months later, a U.S.
naval squadron in the Gulf of Mexico seized Tampico,
Mexico’s  second  most  important  port.  By  the  end  of
1846, the United States controlled much of northeast-
ern Mexico (Map 13.3).

Fighting also broke out in California. In June 1846,
naval  commander  John  Sloat  landed  250  marines  in
Monterey and declared that California “henceforward
will be a portion of the United States.” Simultaneously,

MAP 13.3
The Mexican War, 1846–1848

After moving west from Fort
Leavenworth in present-day Kansas,
American forces commanded by
Captain John C. Frémont and General
Stephen Kearny defeated Mexican
armies in California in 1846 and early
1847. Simultaneously, U.S. troops under
General Zachary Taylor and Colonel
Alfred A. Doniphan won victories over
General Santa Anna’s forces south of
the Rio Grande. In mid-1847, General
Winﬁeld Scott mounted a successful
seaborne attack on Veracruz and
Mexico City, ending the war.

O R E G O N   C O U N T R Y

6
4
8
1

(cid:9)
Sutter’s Fort

.
R
o
t
n
e
m
a
r
c
a
S
(cid:2)(cid:2)

San Francisco
(Yerba Buena)

(cid:2)(cid:2)

Monterey

Great Salt Lake

1845–46

M E X I C O

ColoradoR.

MissouriR.

INDIAN
TERRITORY

IOWA

Ft. Leavenworth

(cid:9)

Bent’s
Fort

(cid:9)

MO.

Santa Barbara
(cid:2)(cid:2)

Los Angeles
(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:8)

3
San
Gabriel
San Diego

(cid:8)
(cid:2)(cid:2)

San Pascual

2
GilaR.

Taos

(cid:2)(cid:2)

Albuquerque

(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:2)(cid:2)
Santa Fe

1846

Socorro

(cid:2)(cid:2)

Claimed
By Texas

(cid:2)(cid:2)

El Paso

(cid:2)(cid:2)

Tucson

ArkansasR.

Fort Smith

(cid:9)

Red R.

(cid:9)
Fort Jessup

Gulf
of
C

alifornia

Chihuahua

(cid:2)(cid:2)

1846

PACIFIC
OCEAN

Campaigns in Mexico

TEXAS
Austin

(cid:2)(cid:2)

San Antonio

(cid:2)(cid:2)

Presidio
del Norte
(cid:2)(cid:2)

Rio
Grande
1847

Presidio de
Rio Grande

(cid:2)(cid:2)

Nueces R.

Goliad

(cid:2)

(cid:2)(cid:2)

Corpus Christi

1846

4
Monterrey

Mier

(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:8)
1846

(cid:9)
(cid:8)

Fort Brown
Matamoros

1

(cid:8)

Buena Vista

5

Taylor (1846–1847)
Doniphan (1846–1847)
Scott (1846–1847)
Santa Anna (1847)

Campaigns in California
Frémont (1845–1846)
Kearny (1846–1847)
Sloat (1846)
Major battle
Sequence of battles

(cid:8)

1

W

0

0

Mazatlán

(cid:2)(cid:2)

1
8
4
7

San Luis
Potosi

(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)

Tampico

(cid:2)(cid:2)

Gulf of
 Mexico

1847

Jalapa

Mexico City
7

(cid:8)

(cid:2)(cid:2)
Puebla

(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:8)
Cerro
Gordo
6

(cid:2)(cid:2)

Veracruz

N

S

E

150

300 miles

150

300 kilometers

