420

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How was the American
acquisition of Califor nia
similar to, and different
from, the American-led
creation of the Texas
Republic (discussed in
Chapter 12)?

American  settlers  in  the  Sacra-
mento River Valley staged a revolt
and, supported by Frémont’s force,
captured  the  town  of  Sonoma,
where  they  proclaimed  the  in-
dependence  of  the  “Bear  Flag
Republic.” To cement these victo-
ries,  Polk  ordered  army  units  to
capture  Santa  Fe  in  New  Mexico
and  then  march  to  southern
California. Despite stiff Mexican resistance, American
forces secured control of California early in 1847.

Polk expected these victories to end the war, but he
underestimated  the  Mexicans’  national  pride  and  the
determination  of  President  Santa  Anna.  In  February
1847 in the Battle of Buena Vista, Santa Anna nearly
defeated  Taylor’s  army  in  northeastern  Mexico.  With
most  Mexican  troops  deployed  in  the  north,  Polk
approved General Winfield Scott’s plan to capture the
port of Veracruz and march 260 miles to Mexico City.
An American army of 14,000 seized the Mexican capi-
tal  in  September  1847.  That  American  victory  cost
Santa Anna his presidency, and a new Mexican govern-
ment made a forced peace with the United States.

Street Fighting in the Calle de Iturbide, 1846

Monterrey, which had resisted Spanish troops during Mexico’s war for independence (1820–1821), was
captured by the Americans only after bloody house-to-house ﬁghting in the Mexican War (1846–1848).
Protected by thick walls and shuttered windows, Mexican defenders pour a withering ﬁre on the dark-
uniformed American troops and buckskin-clad frontier ﬁghters. A large Catholic cathedral looms in the
background, its foundations obscured by the smoke from the Mexicans’ cannons. West Point Museum, United
States Military Academy, West Point, NY.

