CHAPTER 13

  Expansion, War, and Sectional Crisis, 1844–1860

421

A Divisive Victory
Initially, the war with Mexico sparked an explosion of
patriotic expansionism. The Nashville Union hailed it as
a noble struggle to extend “the principles of free gov-
ernment.” However, the war soon divided the nation
(American  Voices,  p.  422).  Some  northern  Whigs —
among them Charles Francis Adams of Massachusetts
(the son of John Quincy Adams) and Chancellor James
Kent of New York — opposed the war on moral grounds,
calling it “causeless & wicked & unjust.” Adams, Kent,
and  other  conscience  Whigs  accused  Polk  of  waging
a  war  of  conquest  to  add  new  slave  states  and  give
slave-owning Democrats permanent control of the fed-
eral  government.  Swayed  by  such  arguments,  troops
deserted in droves (creating the highest desertion rate
of any American war), and antiwar activists denounced
enlistees as “murderers and robbers.” “The United States
will conquer Mexico,” Ralph Waldo Emerson had pre-
dicted as the war began, but “Mexico will poison us.”

When  voters  repudiated  Polk’s  war  policy  in  the
elections  of  1846,  the  Whig  Party  took  control  of
Congress. Whig leaders called for “No  Territory” — a
congressional pledge that the United States would not
seek any land from the Mexican republic. “Away with
this wretched cant about a ‘manifest destiny,’ a ‘divine
mission’ . . . to civilize, and Christianize, and democra-
tize  our  sister  republics  at  the  mouth  of  a  cannon,”
declared New York senator William Duer.

The  Wilmot  Proviso  Polk’s  expansionist  policies
also split the Democrats. As early as 1839, Ohio Demo-
crat  Thomas  Morris  had  warned  that  “the  power  of
slavery is aiming to govern the country, its Constitu-
tions and laws.” In 1846, David Wilmot, an antislavery
Democratic congressman from Pennsyl vania, took up
that refrain and proposed the so-called Wilmot Proviso,
a  ban  on  slavery  in  any  territories  gained  from  the
war.  Whigs  and  antislavery  Democrats  in  the  House
of  Representatives  quickly  passed  the  bill,  dividing
Congress  along  sectional  lines.  “The  madmen  of  the
North . . . ,”  grumbled  the  Richmond  Enquirer,  “have,
we  fear,  cast  the  die  and  numbered  the  days  of  this
glorious Union.” Fearing that outcome, a few proslav-
ery northern senators joined their southern colleagues
to kill the proviso.

Fervent  Democratic  expansionists  now  became
even more aggressive. President Polk, Secretary of State
Buchanan, and Senators Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois
and Jefferson Davis of Mississippi called for the annex-
ation  of  a  huge  swath  of  Mexican  territory  south  of
the Rio Grande. However, John C. Calhoun and other

southern whites feared this demand would extend the
costly war and require the assimilation of many dark-
skinned mestizos. They favored only the annexation of
sparsely settled New Mexico and California. “Ours is a
government  of  the  white  man,”  proclaimed  Calhoun,
which should never welcome “into the Union any but
the  Caucasian  race.”  To  unify  the  Democratic  Party,
Polk and Buchanan accepted Calhoun’s policy. In 1848,
Polk  signed,  and  the  Senate  ratified,  the  Treaty  of
Guadalupe Hidalgo, in which the United States agreed
to pay Mexico $15 million in return for more than one-
third of its territory (Map 13.4).

Congress also created the Oregon Territory in 1848
and, two years later, passed the Oregon Donation Land
Claim  Act,  which  granted  farm-sized  plots  of  “free
land”  to  settlers  who  took  up  residence  before  1854.
Soon, treaties with native peoples extinguished Indian
titles to much of the new territory. With the settlement
of  Oregon  and  the  acquisition  of  New  Mexico  and
California, the American conquest of the Far West was
far advanced.

Free Soil  However, the political debate over expan-
sion was far from over and dominated the election of
1848.  The  Senate’s  rejection  of  the  Wilmot  Proviso
revived Thomas Morris’s charge that leading southern-
ers were part of a “Slave Power” conspiracy to domi-
nate national life. To thwart any such plan, thousands
of  ordinary  northerners,  including  farmer  Abijah
Beckwith  of  Herkimer  County,  New  York,  joined  the
free-soil  movement.  Slavery,  Beckwith  wrote  in  his
diary,  was  an  institution  of  “aristocratic  men”  and  a
danger  to  “the  great  mass  of  the  people  [because
it] . . . threatens  the  general  and  equal  distribution  of
our lands into convenient family farms.”

The  free-soilers  quickly  organized  the  Free-Soil
Party  in  1848.  The  new  party  abandoned  the  Garri-
sonians’ and Liberty Party’s emphasis on the sinfulness
of slavery and the natural rights of African Americans.
Instead, like Beckwith, it depicted slavery as a threat to
republicanism and to the Jeffersonian ideal of a  free-
holder  society,  arguments  that  won  broad  support
among aspiring white farmers. Hundreds of men and
women  in  the  Great  Lakes  states  joined  the  free-soil
organizations  formed  by  the  American  and  Foreign
Anti-Slavery Society. So, too, did Frederick Douglass,
the foremost black abolitionist, who attended the first
Free-Soil Party convention in the summer of 1848 and
endorsed its strategy. However, William Lloyd Garrison
and  other  radical  abolitionists  condemned  the  Free-
Soilers’  stress  on  white  freehold  farming  as  racist
“whitemanism.”

