A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

The Mexican War:

Expansion and Slavery

Conﬂict with Mexico prompted debates over the Polk administration’s aggres-
sive  efforts  to  acquire  territory  and  spread  slavery.  Here,  Polk’s  critics  face  off
against the expansionists.

John L. O’Sullivan, Editor
“Manifest Destiny,” from United States
Magazine and Democratic Review, July
1845

James Buchanan, U.S. Secretary of State
Letter to John Slidell, Minister
Plenipo tentiary to Mexico,
November 1845

Texas is now ours . . . [Britain and France tried] to intrude
themselves [into Texas affairs] . . . for the avowed object
of thwarting our policy and hampering our power, limit-
ing our greatness and checking the fulfillment of our
manifest destiny to overspread the continent allotted by
Providence for the free development of our yearly multi-
plying millions. . . .

The independence of Texas was complete and abso-

lute. It was an independence, not only in fact, but of
right. . . . What then can be more preposterous than all
this clamor by Mexico and the Mexican interest, against
Annexation, as a violation of any rights of hers . . . ?

Nor is there any just foundation for the charge that
Annexation is a great pro-slavery measure — calculated
to increase and perpetuate that institution. Slavery had
nothing to do with it. . . . That it will tend to facilitate and
hasten the disappearance of Slavery from all the northern
tier of the present Slave States, cannot surely admit of
serious question. The greater value in Texas of the slave
labor now employed in those States, must soon produce
the effect of draining off that labor southwardly. . . .

California will, probably, next fall away. . . . Already
the advance guard of the irresistible army of Anglo-Saxon
emigration has begun to pour down upon it, armed with
the plough and the rifle, and marking its trail with schools
and colleges, courts and representative halls, mills and
meeting-houses. A population will soon be in actual
occupation of California. . . . And they will have a right
to independence — to self-government . . . a better and
a truer right than the artificial title of sovereignty in
Mexico, a thousand miles distant, inheriting from
Spain a title good only against those who have none
better.

Source: Sean Wilentz, ed., Major Problems in the Early Republic, 1787–1848 (Lexington,
MA: D. C. Heath, 1991), 525–528.

In your negotiations with Mexico, the independence of
Texas must be considered a settled fact, and is not to be
called in question. . . .

It may, however, be contended on the part of Mexico,
that the Nueces and not the Rio del Norte [Rio Grande],
is the true western boundary of Texas. I need not furnish
you arguments to controvert this position. . . . The juris-
diction of Texas has been extended beyond that river
[the Nueces] and . . . representatives from the country
between it and the Del Norte have participated in the
deliberations both of her Congress and her
Convention. . . .

The case is different in regard to New Mexico. Santa
Fe, its capital, was settled by the Spaniards more than two
centuries ago; and that province has been ever since in
their possession and that of the Republic of Mexico. The
Texans never have conquered or taken possession of
it. . . . [However,] a great portion of New Mexico being
on this side of the Rio Grande and included within the
limits already claimed by Texas, it may hereafter, should
it remain a Mexican province, become a subject of dis-
pute. . . . It would seem to be equally the interest of both
Powers, that New Mexico should belong to the United
States. . . .

It is to be seriously apprehended that both Great
Britain and France have designs upon California. . . .
This Government . . . would vigorously interpose to pre-
vent the latter from becoming either a British or a French
Colony. . . . The possession of the Bay and harbor of San
Francisco, is all important to the United States. . . . Money
would be no object.

Source: Victoria Bissell Brown and Timothy J. Shannon, eds., Going to the Source: The
Bedford Reader in American History (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2004), 1: 260–262.

422

