Charles Sumner, Conscience Whig and Future
Republican Senator from Massachusetts
Letter to Robert Winthrop, Whig
Congressman from Massachusetts,
October 25, 1846

If we regard Texas as a province of Mexico, its bound-
aries must be sought in the geography of that republic. If
we regard it as an independent State, they must be deter-
mined by the extent of jurisdiction which the State was
able to maintain. Now it seems clear that the river Nueces
was always recognized by Mexico as the western bound-
ary; and it is undisputed that the State of Texas, since its
Declaration of Independence, never exercised any juris-
diction beyond the Nueces. . . .

In the month of January, 1846, the President of the
United States directed the troops under General Taylor,
called the Army of Occupation, to take possession of this
region [west of the Nueces River]. Here was an act of
aggression. As might have been expected, it produced
collision. The Mexicans, aroused in self-defence, sought
to repel the invaders. . . .

Here the question occurs, What was the duty of
Congress in this emergency? Clearly to withhold all
sanction to unjust war, — to aggression upon a neigh-
boring Republic. . . . The American forces should have
been directed to retreat, not from any human force, but
from wrongdoing; and this would have been a true
victory.

Alas! This was not the mood of Congress. With
wicked speed a bill was introduced, furnishing large
and unusual supplies of men and money. . . . This was
adopted by a vote of 123 to 67; and the bill then leaped
forth, fully armed, as a measure of open and active hos-
tility against Mexico.

Source: Sean Wilentz, ed., Major Problems in the Early Republic, 1787–1848 (Lexington,
MA: D. C. Heath, 1991), 541.

Walt Whitman, Poet and Editor of the Brooklyn Eagle
Editorial, September 1, 1847

The question whether or no there shall be slavery in the
new territories . . . is a question between the grand body
of white workingmen, the millions of mechanics, farmers,
and operatives of our country, with their interests on the
one side — and the interests of the few thousand rich,
“polished,” and aristocratic owners of slaves at the South,
on the other side.

Experience has proved . . . that a stalwart mass of
respectable workingmen, cannot exist, much less flourish,
in a thorough slave State. Let any one think for a moment
what a different appearance New York, Pennsylvania, or
Ohio, would present — how much less sturdy indepen-
dence and family happiness there would be — were slaves
the workmen there, instead of each man as a general
thing being his own workman. . . .

Slavery is a good thing enough . . . to the rich — the

one out of thousands; but it is destructive to the dig-
nity and independence of all who work, and to labor
itself. . . . All practice and theory . . . are strongly arrayed
in favor of limiting slavery to where it already exists.

Source: Sean Wilentz, ed., Major Problems in the Early Republic, 1787–1848 (Lexington,
MA: D. C. Heath, 1991), 543.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  What arguments do Buchanan and Sumner make about
the boundaries of Texas, the issue that sparked the ﬁght-
ing? Whose argument is more persuasive and why?
2.  Do O’Sullivan’s and Buchanan’s assertions support or

undercut the claim that the Mexican War was an aggres-
sive act of imperialism?

3.  Why does Whitman oppose the expansion of slavery?

Given Whitman’s views, who might have gotten his vote
in the election of 1848? Why?

4.  Two of the sources are newspaper editorials; two are

letters written by or addressed to public ofﬁcials. How
does the nature of each of these sources inﬂuence its
content?

423

