424

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

As part of the Compromise of 1850, Texas
ceded to the  United States some of the
disputed lands. These lands and other parts
of the Mexican cession were then organized
into the territories of New Mexico and Utah.

M

ississippi R.

Territory ceded by
Mexico to U.S., 1848

Colorado R.

N

E

W

S

Under terms of the Compromise of 1850,
California became a free state .

Gadsden
                      Pu rchase, 1853

Gila R.

Claim
waived
by Texas,
1850

Pecos R.

PACIFIC
O C EAN

0

0

100

200 miles

100

200 kilometers

In the Gadsden Purchase of 1853, the United
States acquired additional land from Mexico
to facilitate the construction of a railroad
from Texas to California.

M E X I C O

Dotted lines show the eventual state
boundaries for Mexican cession territories.

Missouri R.

U N I T E D   S T A T E S

Arkansas R.

Red R.

After winning independence
from Mexico in 1836, the
Republic of Texas remained an
independent nation until admitted
to the U.S. as the twenty-eighth
state in December 1845.

REPUBLIC OF TEXAS
(1836–1845)

Trinity R.

Sabine R.

Brazos R.

N
u
e
c
e

s R.

Rio Grande

Galveston Bay

Corpus
Christi Bay

Gulf of Mexico

MAP 13.4
The Mexican Cession, 1848

In the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848), Mexico ceded to the United States its vast northern
territories — the present-day states of California, Nevada, Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, and half
of Colorado. These new territories, President Polk boasted to Congress, “constitute of themselves
a country large enough for a great empire, and the acquisition is second in importance only to that
of Louisiana in 1803.”

The Election of 1848  The conflict over slavery took
a  toll  on  Polk  and  the  Democratic  Party.  Scorned  by
Whigs and Free-Soilers and exhausted by his rigorous
dawn-to-midnight work regime, Polk declined to run
for a second term and died just three months after leav-
ing  office.  In  his  place,  the  Democrats  nominated
Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan, an avid expansionist
who  had  advocated  buying  Cuba,  annexing  Mexico’s
Yucatán Peninsula, and taking all of Oregon. To main-
tain  party  unity  on  the  slavery
issue, Cass promoted a new idea,
squatter  sovereignty.  Under  this
plan,  Con gress  would  allow  set-
tlers  in  each  territory  to  deter-
mine its status as free or slave.

Cass’s  doctrine  of  squatter
sovereignty  failed  to  persuade
those  northern  Democrats  who

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What did conscience
Whigs, David Wilmot,
and free-soilers have in
common, and why did
they all rise to prominence
between 1846 and 1848?

opposed  any  expansion  of  slavery.  They  joined  the
Free-Soil  Party,  as  did  former  Democratic  president
Martin Van Buren, who became its candidate for pres-
ident.  To  attract  Whig  votes,  the  Free-Soilers  chose
conscience  Whig  Charles  Francis  Adams  for  vice
president.

The  Whigs  nominated  General  Zachary  Taylor.
Taylor was a Louisiana slave owner firmly committed
to the defense of slavery in the South but not in the ter-
ritories, a position that won him support in the North.
Moreover, the general’s military exploits had made him
a popular hero, known affectionately among his troops
as “Old Rough and Ready.” In 1848, as in 1840 with the
candidacy of William Henry Harrison, running a mili-
tary hero worked for the Whigs. Taylor took 47 percent
of  the  popular  vote  to  Cass’s  42  percent.  However,
Taylor won a majority in the electoral college (163 to
127) only because Van Buren and the Free-Soil ticket

