CHAPTER 13

  Expansion, War, and Sectional Crisis, 1844–1860

425

land in the Sacramento River Valley. He tried to hide
the  discovery,  but  by  mid-1848  Americans  from
Monterey  and  San  Francisco  were  pouring  into  the
foothills,  along  with  hundreds  of  Indians  and
Californios  and  scores  of  Australians,  Mexicans,  and
Chileans. The gold rush was on (America Compared,
p. 426). By January 1849, sixty-one crowded ships had
left  New  York  and  other  northeastern  ports  to  sail
around  Cape  Horn  to  San  Francisco;  by  May,  twelve
thousand  wagons  had  crossed  the  Missouri  River
bound for the goldfields (Map 13.5). For Bernard Reid,
the  overland  trip  on  the  Pioneer  Line  was  “a  long
dreadful  dream,”  beset  by  cholera,  scurvy,  and  near
starvation. Still, by the end of 1849, more than 80,000
people, mostly men — the so-called forty-niners — had
arrived in California.

The Forty-Niners  The forty-niners lived in crowded,
chaotic  towns  and  mining  camps  amid  gamblers,
saloon  keepers,  and  prostitutes.  They  set  up  “claims
clubs” to settle mining disputes and cobbled together a
system of legal rules based on practice “back East.” The
American miners usually treated alien whites fairly but
ruthlessly  expelled  Indians,  Mexicans,  and  Chileans
from the goldfields or confined them to marginal dig-
gings.  When  substantial  numbers  of  Chinese  miners
arrived in 1850, often in the employ of Chinese com-
panies,  whites  called  for  laws  to  expel  them  from
California.

The first miners to exploit a site often struck it rich.
They  scooped  up  the  easily  reached  deposits,  leaving
small  pickings  for  later  arrivals.  His  “high  hopes”
wrecked,  one  latecomer  saw  himself  and  most  other
forty-niners as little better than “convicts condemned
to exile and hard labor.” They faced disease and death
as  well:  “Diarrhea  was  so  general  during  the  fall  and
winter months” and so often fatal, a Sacramento doctor
remarked, that it was called “the disease of California.”
Like many migrants, William Swain gave up the search
for gold in 1850 and borrowed funds to return to his
wife, infant daughter, and aged mother on a New York
farm. “O William,” his wife Sabrina had written, “I wish
you had been content to stay at home, for there is no
real home for me without you.”

Thousands of disillusioned forty-niners were either
too ashamed or too tired or too ambitious to go home.
Some became wageworkers for companies that engaged
in hydraulic or underground mining; others turned to
farming. “Instead of going to the mines where fortune
hangs  upon  the  merest  chance,”  a  frustrated  miner
advised  emigrants,  “[you]  should  at  once  commence
the cultivation of the soil.”

“This Is the House That Polk Built”

President James Polk’s administration started off with a
bang — a long-sought Democratic free-trade tariff, a
compromise settlement of the Oregon boundary dispute
with Great Britain, and a war to seize California and other
Mexican provinces. This ambitious agenda promised fame
for the president, but the cartoonist pictures Polk as a
worried man, afraid that he has built a house of cards
that might collapse at any time. © Bettmann/Corbis.

took enough votes in New York to deny Cass a victory
there. Although their numbers were small, antislavery
voters in New York had denied the presidency to Clay
in 1844 and to Cass in 1848. The bitter debate over slav-
ery had changed the dynamics of national politics.

California Gold and Racial Warfare
Even  before  Taylor  took  office,  events  in  sparsely
settled  California  took  center  stage.  In  January  1848,
workers building a milldam for John A. Sutter in the
Sierra  Nevada  foothills  came  across  flakes  of  gold.
Sutter was a Swiss immigrant who came to California
in  1839, became a Mexican citizen, and accumulated

