A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

The Gold Rush: California and Australia

In 1849, hundreds of Australian men booked passage for
San Francisco, hoping to make their fortune in the Califor-
nia  goldﬁelds.  A  mere  two  years  later,  thousands  more
Australian  “diggers”  ﬂocked  to  the  colony  of  Victoria  in
Australia  itself,  drawn  by  a  gold  strike  that  yielded  one-
third of the world’s gold output during the 1850s.

In California and Victoria, miners lived mostly in can-
vas tents and ﬂimsy wood shanties and found gold initially
in stream beds. In both territories, the huge migration vir-
tually  wiped  out  the  aboriginal  peoples.  Similarly,  both
rushes  attracted  about  40,000  Chinese  miners,  an  inﬂux
that,  in  the  race-conscious,  English-speaking  world  of
the  nineteenth  century,  prompted  riots  and  legislation
in  both  regions  to  restrict  Asian  migrants.  Finally,  only
a  few  California  “forty-niners”  or  Australian  “diggers”
made a fortune, perhaps 5 of every 100.

There  were  differences  as  well.  Upon  a  gold  strike
in California, the prospectors would stake their claims and

collectively protect those claims — a rough system of dem-
ocratic self-rule. In Victoria, the British crown owned much
of  the  land  and  gold  commissioners  and  police  adminis-
tered the diggings, selling licenses to dig for 30 shillings a
month (about $200 in present-day U.S. dollars). Distressed
by license fees and corrupt local ofﬁcials, 10,000 miners at
Ballarat voted to create a Reform League, which demanded
abolition  of  fees  and  universal  male  suffrage.  When
authorities  ignored  their  demands,  500  miners  seized  a
rich mine at Eureka. In the ensuing struggle, British troops
killed 22 miners, ending the armed uprising.

Despite  these  differences — as  well  as  a  signiﬁcant
disparity in the proportion of women — California and Vic-
toria  were  both  transformed  by  the  nearly  simultaneous
discovery  of  gold.  Within  a  few  decades  a  mining  boom
vastly  increased  their  wealth  and  boasted  their  popula-
tions, as the following chart indicates:

TABLE 13.1

Nonnative Population Increases from Gold Rush in United States and Australia

California, United States

Victoria, Australia

Total

Women

Nonwhite

Total

Women

Nonwhite

1845

  11,000

1850

  93,000

    7,000

  7%

1860

380,000

120,000  31%

1870

560,000

211,000  37%

  1%

15%

11%

1851

  97,000

  39,000  40%

1861

540,000

219,000  40%

1871

746,000

339,000  45%

0%

5%

4%

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  How would you account for the relative num-
bers of women in Victoria and California and
how those proportions changed over time?
How might the percentage of women affect
the character of the two societies?

2.  Why were there no equivalents of the Bal-

larat Reform League and the Eureka Stockade
in California, given that the two rushes were
similar in so many ways and fostered similar
anti-Chinese violence and legislation?

Racial Warfare and Land Rights  Farming required
arable land, and Mexican grantees and native peoples
owned or claimed much of it. The American migrants
brushed  aside  both  groups,  brutally  eliminating  the
Indians  and  wearing  down  Mexican  claimants  with
legal tactics and political pressure. The subjugation of

the  native  peoples  came  first.  When  the  gold  rush
began  in  1848,  there  were  about  150,000  Indians  in
California;  by  1861,  there  were  only  30,000.  As  else-
where  in  the  Americas,  European  diseases  took  the
lives  of  thousands.  In  California,  white  settlers  also
undertook  systematic  campaigns  of  extermination,

426

