CHAPTER 13

  Expansion, War, and Sectional Crisis, 1844–1860

427

MAP 13.5
The California Gold Rush, 1849–1857

Traveling from all parts of the
world — South America, Europe,
China, and Australia, as well as
the eastern United States — tens
of thousands of bonanza-seekers
converged on the California gold-
ﬁelds. Miners traveling by sea landed
at San Francisco, which mushroomed
into a substantial city; many other
prospectors trekked overland to the
goldﬁelds on the California Trail. By
the mid-1850s, the gold rush was over:
almost as many people were sailing
from San Francisco each year as were
arriving to seek their fortune.

0

0

W

Gold mining region

Instant metropolis

Major ranches
(supplying food)

Major gold mine
Outfitting center
Sea link with eastern U.S.
(via Cape Horn)

Main supply routes to
goldfields

OLD C
A
LIF
O
R
NI
A
 T
R
A
I
L

ramento R.

S
a
c

25

50 miles

25

50 kilometers

Sacramento

Sea Passengers through
San Francisco

arriving

departing

1849 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 1857

Lake
Tahoe

XPRESS

 E
Y
N
O
P

UTAH
TERRITORY

American R.

Coloma
(Sutter's Mill)

S
I
E
R
R
A

Benicia

N

S

E

San Francisco

O REAL
MIN
A
EL C

PACIFIC
O CEAN

San Jose

N
E
V
A
D
A
Tuolumne R.

CALIF.

Stockton

San Jo
aquin R.

and local political leaders did little to stop them: “A  war
of  extermination  will  continue  to  be  waged . . . until
the Indian race becomes extinct,” predicted Governor
Peter Burnett in 1851. Congress abetted these assaults.
At the bidding of white Californians, it repudiated trea-
ties that federal agents had negotiated with 119 tribes
and that had provided the Indians with 7 million acres
of land. Instead, in 1853, Congress authorized five res-
ervations of only 25,000 acres each and refused to pro-
vide the Indians with military protection.

Consequently, some settlers simply murdered Indi-
ans  to  push  them  off  nonreservation lands. The  Yuki
people,  who  lived  in  the  Round  Valley  in  northern
California,  were  one  target.  As  the  Petaluma  Journal
reported in April 1857: “Within the past three weeks,
from 300 to 400 bucks, squaws and children have been
killed  by  whites.”  Other  white  Californians  turned  to
slave trading: “Hundreds of Indians have been stolen
and  carried  into  the  settlements  and  sold,”  the  state’s
Indian Affairs superintendent reported in 1856. Labor-
hungry  farmers  quickly  put  them  to  work.  Indians
were  “all  among  us,  around  us,  with  no  house  and
kitchen  without  them,”  recalled  one  farmer.  Expelled
from  their  lands  and  widely  dispersed,  many  Indian
peoples  simply  vanished  as  distinct  communities.
Those tribal communities that survived were a shadow
of their former selves. In 1854, at least 5,000 Yukis lived

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What were the main
changes caused by the
huge increase in Califor-
nia’s population and its
composition between
1849 and 1870?

in  the  Round  Valley;  a  decade
later, only 85 men and 215 women
remained.

that

The Mexicans and Californios
who  held  grants  to  thousands
of  acres  were  harder  to  dislodge.
The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
the  property
guaranteed
owned  by  Mexicans  would  be
“inviolably  respected.”  Although  many  of  the  800
grants  made  by  Spanish  and  Mexican  authorities  in
California  were  either  fraudulent  or  poorly  docu-
mented,  the  Land  Claims  Commission  created  by
Congress eventually upheld the validity of 75 percent
of them. In the meantime, hundreds of Americans had
set  up  farms  on  the  sparsely  settled  grants.  Having
come of age in the antimonopoly Jacksonian era, these
American  squatters  rejected  the  legitimacy  of  the
Californios’  claims  to  unoccupied  and  unimproved
land  and  successfully  pressured  local  land  commis-
sioners and judges to void or reduce the size of many
grants. Indeed, the Americans’ clamor for land was so
intense and their numbers so large that many Californio
claimants sold off their properties at bargain prices.

In  northern  California,  farmers  found  that  they
could grow most eastern crops: corn and oats to feed
work horses, pigs, and chickens; potatoes, beans, and

