428

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

settlers  to  skip  the  territorial  phase  and  immediately
apply  for  statehood.  In  November  1849,  Californians
ratified a state constitution prohibiting slavery, and the
president urged Congress to admit California as a free
state.

Constitutional Conflict  California’s bid for admis-
sion produced passionate debates in Congress and four
distinct  positions  regarding  the  expansion  of  slavery.
First, John C. Calhoun took his usual extreme stance.
On  the  verge  of  death,  Calhoun  reiterated  his  deep
resentment of the North’s “long-continued agitation of
the slavery question.” To uphold southern honor (and
political power), he proposed a constitutional amend-
ment to create a dual presidency, permanently dividing
executive  power  between  the  North  and  the  South.
Calhoun  also  advanced  the  radical  argument  that
Congress  had  no  constitutional  authority  to  regulate
slavery in the territories. Slaves were property, Calhoun
insisted,  and  the  Constitution  restricted  Congress’s
power to abrogate or limit property rights. That argu-
ment ran counter to a half century of practice: Congress
had  prohibited  slavery  in  the  Northwest  Territory  in
1787 and had extended that ban to most of the Louis-
iana Purchase in the Missouri Compromise of 1820. But
Calhoun’s assertion that  “slavery  follows  the  flag” —
that  planters  could  by  right  take  their  slave  property
into new territories — won support in the Deep South.
However,  many  southerners  favored  a  second,
more moderate proposal to extend the Missouri Com-
promise line to the Pacific Ocean. This plan won the
backing of Pennsylvanian James Buchanan and other
influential  northern  Democrats.  It  would  guarantee
slave owners access to some western territory, includ-
ing a separate state in southern California.

A  third  alternative  was  squatter  sovereignty —
allowing  settlers  in  a  territory  to  decide  the  status  of
slavery. Lewis Cass had advanced this idea in 1848, and
Democratic  senator  Stephen  Douglas  of  Illinois  now
became its champion. Douglas called his plan “popular
sovereignty”  to  link  it  to  republican  ideology,  which
placed  ultimate  power  in  the  hands  of  the  people
(Chapter 5), and it had considerable appeal. Politicians
hoped  it  would  remove  the  explosive  issue  of  slavery
from  Congress,  and  settlers  welcomed  the  power  it
would give them. However, popular sovereignty was a
slippery concept. Could residents accept or ban slavery
when  a  territory  was  first  organized?  Or  must  they
delay that decision until a territory had enough people
to  frame  a  constitution  and  apply  for  statehood?  No
one knew.

For  their  part,  antislavery  advocates  refused  to
accept  any  plan  for  California  or  the  territories  that

A Californio Patriarch

The descendant of a Spanish family that had lived — and
prospered — in Mexico since the Spanish Conquest, Mariano
Guadalupe Vallejo served in Mexican California as a military
ofﬁcer. In the 1830s and 1840s, he received land grants
totaling 270,000 acres in the Sonoma Valley north of San
Francisco. Vallejo, the father of seventeen children (eleven of
whom survived childhood), presents himself in this photo-
graph as a proud patriarch, surrounded by two daughters and
three granddaughters. Although he favored the American
conquest of 1846, Vallejo was imprisoned for a short period
and subsequently suffered severe ﬁnancial setbacks, losing
most of his vast landholdings to squatters and rival claimants.
University of California at Berkeley, Bancroft Library.

peas for the farm table; and refreshing grapes, apples,
and  peaches.  Ranchers  gradually  replaced  Spanish
cattle  with  American  breeds  that  yielded  more  milk
and meat, which found a ready market as California’s
population  shot  up  to  380,000  by  1860  and  560,000
by 1870. Most important, using the latest agricultural
machinery  and  scores  of  hired  workers,  California
farmers  produced  huge  crops  of  wheat  and  barley,
which San Francisco merchants exported to Europe at
high prices. The gold rush turned into a wheat boom.

1850: Crisis and Compromise
The  rapid  settlement  of  California  qualified  it  for
admis sion to the Union. Hoping to avoid an extended
debate  over  slavery,  President  Taylor  advised  the

