CHAPTER 13

  Expansion, War, and Sectional Crisis, 1844–1860

429

would  allow  slavery.  Senator  Salmon  P.  Chase  of
Ohio, elected by a Democratic–Free-Soil coalition, and
Senator William H. Seward, a New York Whig, urged a
fourth position: that federal legislation restrict slavery
within  its  existing  boundaries  and  eventually  extin-
guish  it  completely.  Condemning  slavery  as  “morally
unjust, politically unwise, and socially pernicious” and
invoking “a higher law than the Constitution,” Seward
demanded bold action to protect freedom, “the com-
mon heritage of mankind.”

A Complex Compromise  Standing on the brink of
disaster,  senior  Whig  and  Democratic  politicians
worked  desperately  to  preserve  the  Union.  Aided  by
Millard Fillmore, who became president in 1850 after

Zachary  Taylor’s  sudden  death,  Whig  leaders  Henry
Clay  and  Daniel  Webster  and  Democrat  Stephen  A.
Douglas won the passage of five separate laws known
collectively as the Compromise of 1850. To mollify the
South, the compromise included a new Fugitive Slave
Act giving federal support to slave catchers. To satisfy
the  North,  the  legislation  admitted  California  as  a
free  state,  resolved  a  boundary  dispute  between  New
Mexico and Texas in favor of New Mexico, and abol-
ished the slave trade (but not slavery) in the District of
Columbia. Finally, the compromise organized the rest
of the conquered Mexican lands into the territories of
New  Mexico  and  Utah  and,  invoking  popular  sover-
eignty, left the issue of slavery in the hands of their res-
idents (Map 13.6).

Compromise of 1850
Voters allowed to decide
whether to permit slavery

Territory left unorganized

Kansas-Nebraska Act, 1854

Voters allowed to decide
whether to permit slavery

New boundaries

Free states and territories

Slave states

C A N A D A

OREGON
TERRITORY
1848

NEBRASKA
TERRITORY
1854

UTAH TERRITORY
1850

CALIF.
1850

NEW MEXICO
TERRITORY
1850

MAINE

VT.

N.H.
MASS.

R.I.
CONN.

N.J.
DEL.
MD.

MINNESOTA
TERRITORY
1849

WIS.

MICH.

IOWA

OHIO

ILL.

IND.

MO.

KY.

TENN.

KANSAS
TERRITORY
1854

INDIAN
RESERVE

TEXAS

ARK.

LA.

N.Y.

PA.

VIRGINIA

N.C.

S.C.

MISS. ALA.

GA.

A T L A N T I C
O C E A N

FLA.

PACIFIC
OCEAN

N

E

W

S

M E X I C O

G u l f   o f   M e x i c o

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

MAP 13.6
The Compromise of 1850 and the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854

The contest over the expansion of slavery involved vast territories. The Compromise of 1850
peacefully resolved the status of the Far West: California would be a free state, and settlers in
the Utah and New Mexico territories would vote for or against slavery (the doctrine of popular
sovereignty). However, the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 voided the Missouri Compromise (1820)
and instituted popular sovereignty in those territories. That decision sparked a bitter local war and
revealed a fatal ﬂaw in the doctrine.

