430

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

Resolving the Crisis
of 1850

By 1850, Whig Henry Clay
had been in Congress for
nearly four decades. Now in
partnership with fellow Whig
Daniel Webster and Democrat
Stephen Douglas, Clay fashioned
a complex — and controversial —
compromise that preserved the
Union. In this engraving, he
addresses a crowded Senate
chamber, with Webster sitting
immediately to his left. Clay
addresses his remarks to his
prime antagonist, southern
advocate John C. Calhoun,
the man with the long white
hair at the far right of the
picture. Library of Congress.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
How did the Compromise
of 1850 resolve the various
disputes over slavery, and
who beneﬁtted more from
its terms?

The Compromise of 1850 pre-
served  national  unity  by  accept-
ing  once  again  the  stipulation
advanced by the South since 1787:
no  Union  without  slavery.  Still,
southerners  feared  for  the  future
and threatened secession. Militant
activists (or “fire-eaters”) in South
Caro lina,  Georgia,  Mississippi,  and  Alabama  orga-
nized  special  conventions  to  safeguard  “southern
rights.”  Georgia  congressman  Alexander  H.  Stephens
called  on  convention  delegates  to  prepare  “men  and
money,  arms  and  munitions,  etc.  to  meet  the  emer-
gency.” A majority of delegates remained committed to
the  Union,  but  only  on  the  condition  that  Congress
protect slavery where it existed and grant statehood to
any  territory  that  ratified  a  proslavery  constitution.
Political wizardry had solved the immediate crisis, but
not the underlying issues.

The End of the Second Party
System, 1850–1858
The Missouri Compromise had endured for a genera-
tion,  and  the  architects  of  the  Compromise  of  1850
hoped their agreement would have an even longer life.

Religious leaders, conservative businessmen, and lead-
ing judges called upon citizens to support the compro-
mise to preserve “government and civil society.” Their
hopes quickly faded. Demanding freedom for fugitive
slaves and free soil in the West, antislavery northerners
refused  to  accept  the  legitimacy  of  the  compromise.
For their part, proslavery southerners plotted to extend
slavery  into  the  West,  the  Caribbean,  and  Central
America. The resulting disputes destroyed the Second
Party System and deepened the crisis of the Union.

Resistance to the Fugitive Slave Act
The Fugitive Slave Act proved the most controversial
element  of  the  compromise.  The  act  required  federal
magistrates to determine the status of alleged runaways
and denied them a jury trial or even the right to testify.
Using  its  provisions,  southern  owners  re-enslaved
about 200 fugitives (as well as some free blacks).

The  plight  of  the  runaways  and  the  presence  of
slave  catchers  aroused  popular  hostility  in  the  North
and  Midwest.  Ignoring  the  threat  of  substantial  fines
and prison sentences, free blacks and white abolition-
ists protected fugitives. In October 1850, Boston aboli-
tionists  helped  two  slaves  escape  from  Georgia  slave
catchers.  Rioters  in  Syracuse,  New  York,  broke  into
a  courthouse,  freed  a  fugitive,  and  accused  the  U.S.
marshal  of  kidnapping.  Abandoning  nonviolence,

