CHAPTER 13

  Expansion, War, and Sectional Crisis, 1844–1860

431

in  Christiana,  Pennsylvania,

Frederick Douglass declared, “The only way to make a
Fugitive Slave Law a dead letter is to make half a dozen
or  more  dead  kidnappers.”  Precisely  such  a  deadly
result  occurred
in
September  1851,  when  twenty  African  Americans
exchanged gunfire with Maryland slave catchers, kill-
ing two of them. Federal authorities indicted thirty-six
blacks  and  four  whites  for  treason  and  other  crimes,
but a Pennsylvania jury acquitted one defendant, and
the government dropped charges against the rest.

Harriet  Beecher  Stowe’s  novel  Uncle  Tom’s  Cabin
(1852)  boosted  opposition  to  the  Fugitive  Slave  Act.
Conveying  the  moral  principles  of  abolitionism  in
heartrending  personal  situations — using  the  now
familiar  literary  trope  of  sentimental  domesticity —
Stowe’s book quickly sold 310,000 copies in the United
States  and  double  that  number  in  Britain,  where  it
prompted  an  antislavery  petition  signed  by  560,000
English  women.  As  Uncle  Tom’s  Cabin  sparked  an
unprecedented  discussion  of  race  and  slavery,  state
legislators  in  the  North  protested  that  the  Fugitive
Slave  Act  violated  state  sovereignty,  and  they  passed
personal-liberty laws that guaranteed to all residents,
including alleged fugitives, the right to a jury trial. In
1857,  the  Wisconsin  Supreme  Court  went  further,
ruling in Ableman v. Booth that the Fugitive Slave Act
was  unconstitutional  because  it  violated  the  rights
of Wisconsin’s citizens. Taking a states’ rights stance —
traditionally  a  southern  position — the  Wisconsin
court  denied  the  authority  of  the  federal  judiciary  to
review  its  decision.  In  1859,  Chief  Justice  Roger  B.
Taney  led  a  unanimous  Supreme  Court  in  affirming
the supremacy of federal courts — a position that has
withstood the test of time — and upholding the consti-
tutionality  of  the  Fugitive  Slave  Act.  By  then,  as
Frederick  Douglass  had  hoped,  popular  opposition
had made the law a “dead letter.”

The Whigs Disintegrate
and New Parties Rise
The conflict over slavery split both major political par-
ties along sectional lines. Hoping to unify their party,
the  Whigs  ran  another  war  hero,  General  Winfield
Scott, as their presidential candidate in 1852. Among
the  Democrats,  southerners  demanded  a  candidate
who  embraced  Calhoun’s  constitutional  argument
that  all  territories  were  open  to  slavery.  However,
northern  and  midwestern  Democrats  stood  behind
the three leading candidates — Lewis Cass of Michigan,
Stephen  Douglas  of  Illinois,  and  James  Buchanan  of
Pennsylvania — who  advocated  popular  sovereignty.

Ultimately,  the  party  settled  on
Franklin  Pierce  of  New  Hamp-
shire,  a  congenial  man  who  was
sympathetic to the South. As the
Whig  Party  fragmented  over  slavery,  Pierce  swept  to
victory.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Why did the Fugitive Slave
Act fail?

Proslavery Initiatives  As president, Pierce pursued
an expansionist foreign policy. To assist northern mer-
chants, who wanted a commercial empire, he negoti-
ated  a  trade-opening  treaty  with  Japan.  To  mollify
southern  expansionists,  who  desired  a  plantation
empire, he sought extensive Mexican lands south of the
Rio  Grande.  Ultimately,  Pierce  settled  for  a  smaller
slice of land — the Gadsden Purchase of 1853, now part
of Arizona and New Mexico — that opened the way for
his  negotiator,  James  Gadsden,  to  build  a  transconti-
nental rail line from New Orleans to Los Angeles.

Pierce’s  most  controversial  initiatives  came  in  the
Caribbean and Central America. Southern expansion-
ists  had  long  urged  Cuban  slave  owners  to  declare
independence from Spain and join the United States.
To  assist  the  expansionists  and  the  American  traders
who  still  supplied  enslaved  Africans  to  Cuba,  Pierce
threatened war with Spain and covertly supported fili-
bustering (private military) expeditions to Cuba. When
Secretary of State William L. Marcy arranged in 1854
for  American  diplomats  in  Europe  to  compose  the
Ostend Manifesto, which urged Pierce to seize Cuba,
northern  Democrats  denounced  these  aggressive  ini-
tiatives and scuttled the planters’ dreams of American
expansion into the Caribbean.

The  Kansas-Nebraska  Act  The  Caribbean  was  a
sideshow.  The  main  stage  was  the  trans-Mississippi
west, where a major controversy in 1854 destroyed the
Whig Party and sent the Union spinning toward disas-
ter.  The  Missouri  Compromise  prohibited  new  slave
states  in  the  Louisiana  Purchase  north  of  36°30',  so
southern senators had long prevented the creation of
new  territories  there.  It  remained  Permanent  Indian
Territory. Now Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois
wanted to open it up, allowing a transcontinental rail-
road to link Chicago to California. Douglas proposed
to  extinguish  Native  American  rights  on  the  Great
Plains and create a large free territory called Nebraska.
Southern  politicians  opposed  Douglas’s  initiative.
They hoped to extend slavery throughout the Louisiana
Purchase and to have a southern city — New Orleans,
Memphis, or St. Louis — as the eastern terminus of a
transcontinental  railroad.  To  win  their  support,
Douglas amended his bill so that it explicitly repealed

