432

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

the Missouri Compromise and organized the region on
the basis of popular sovereignty. He also agreed to the
formation  of  two  territories,  Nebraska  and  Kansas,
raising the prospect that settlers in the southern one,
Kansas, would choose slavery. Knowing the revised bill
would “raise a hell of a storm” in the North, Douglas
argued that Kansas was not suited to plantation agri-
culture and would become a free state. After weeks of
bitter  debate,  the  Senate  passed  the  Kansas-Nebraska
Act.  As  1,600  petitions  opposing  the  bill  flooded  the
House of Representatives, the measure barely squeaked
through.

The Republican and American Parties  The Kansas-
Nebraska Act of 1854 was a disaster for the American
political  system.  It  finished  off  the  Whig  Party:  “We
went  to  bed  one  night  old  fashioned,  conservative
Union Whigs & and waked up stark mad abolitionists,”
cotton textile magnate Amos Lawrence lamented. And
it  crippled  the  Democracy,  because  “anti-Nebraska
Democrats”  denounced  the  act  as  “part  of  a  great
scheme for extending and perpetuating supremacy of
the slave power.” In 1854, they joined ex-Whigs, Free-
Soilers,  and  abolitionists  to  form  a  new  Republican
Party.

The new party was a coalition of “strange, discor-
dant  and  even  hostile  elements,”  one  Republican
observed.  However,  all  its  members  opposed  slavery,
which,  they  argued,  drove  down
the  wages  of  free  workers  and
degraded  the  dignity  of  manual
labor.  Like  Thomas  Jefferson,
Republicans  praised  a  society
based  on  “the  middling  classes

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
What were the main policy
objectives of the Republi-
can and American parties?

who own the soil and work it with their own hands.”
Abraham Lincoln, an ex-Whig from Illinois, conveyed
the new party’s vision of social mobility. “There is no
permanent  class  of  hired  laborers  among  us,”  he
declared, ignoring the growing social divisions in the
industrializing  North  and  Midwest.  Lincoln  and  his
fellow Republicans envisioned a society of independent
farmers, artisans, and proprietors, and they celebrated
middle-class  values:  domesticity  and  respectability,
religious commitment, and capitalist enterprise.

The Republicans faced strong competition from the
American,  or  Know-Nothing,  Party,  which  had  its
origins in the anti-immigrant and anti-Catholic move-
ments of the 1840s (Chapter 9). In 1850, these nativist
societies  banded  together  as  the  Order  of  the  Star-
Spangled Banner; the following year, they formed the
American Party. When questioned, the party’s secrecy-
conscious  members  often  replied,  “I  know  nothing,”
hence  the  nickname.  The  American  (or  Know-
Nothing) Party program was far from secret, however:
party  supporters  wanted  to  mobilize  native-born
Protestants  against  the  “alien  menace”  of  Irish  and
German Catholics, prohibit further immigration, and
institute literacy tests for voting. Northern members of
the  party  had  a  strong  antislavery  outlook.  In  1854,
voters elected dozens of American Party candidates to
the House of Representatives and gave the party con-
trol  of  the  state  governments  of  Massachusetts  and
Pennsylvania.  The  emergence  of  a  Protestant-based
nativist  party  to  replace  the  Whigs  became  a  real
possibility.

Bleeding  Kansas  Meanwhile, thousands of settlers
rushed  into  the  Kansas  Territory,  putting  Douglas’s

Armed Abolitionists in Kansas,
1859

The confrontation between North and
South in Kansas took many forms. In
the spring of 1859, Dr. John Doy (seated)
slipped across the border into Missouri
and tried to lead thirteen escaped slaves
to freedom in Kansas, only to be captured
and jailed in St. Joseph, Missouri. The
serious-looking men standing behind Doy,
well armed with guns and Bowie knives,
attacked the jail and carried Doy back to
Kansas. The photograph celebrated and
memorialized their successful exploit.
Kansas State Historical Society.

