CHAPTER 13

  Expansion, War, and Sectional Crisis, 1844–1860

433

concept  of  popular  sovereignty  to  the  test.  On  the
side  of  slavery,  Missouri  senator  David  R.  Atchison
encouraged residents of his state to cross temporarily
into Kansas to vote in crucial elections there. Opposing
Atchison was the abolitionist New England Emigrant
Aid Society, which dispatched free-soilers to Kansas. In
1855,  the  Pierce  administration  accepted  the  legiti-
macy of a proslavery legislature in Lecompton, Kansas,
which had been elected with aid from border-crossing
Missourians.  However,  the  majority  of  Kansas  resi-
dents  favored  free  soil  and  refused  allegiance  to  the
Lecompton government.

In 1856, both sides turned to violence, prompting
Horace  Greeley  of  the  New  York  Tribune  to  label  the
territory “Bleeding Kansas.” A proslavery force, seven
hundred strong, looted and burned the free-soil town
of Lawrence. The attack enraged John Brown, a fifty-
six-year-old  abolitionist  from  New  York  and  Ohio,
who  commanded  a  free-state  militia.  Brown  was  a
complex  man  with  a  record  of  failed  businesses,  but
he  had  an  intellectual  and  moral  intensity  that  won
the  trust  of  influential  people.  Avenging  the  sack  of
Lawrence, Brown and his followers murdered five pro-
slavery  settlers  at  Pottawatomie.  Abolitionists  must
“fight fire with fire” and “strike terror in the hearts of
the proslavery people,” Brown declared. The attack on
Lawrence and the Pottawatomie killings started a guer-
rilla war in Kansas that took nearly two hundred lives.

Buchanan’s Failed Presidency
The  violence  in  Kansas  dominated  the  presidential
election of 1856. The new Republican Party counted on
anger  over  Bleeding  Kansas  to  boost  the  party’s  for-
tunes.  Its  platform  denounced  the  Kansas-Nebraska
Act  and  demanded  that  the  federal  government  pro-
hibit  slavery  in  all  the  territories.  Republicans  also
called  for  federal  subsidies  for  transcontinental  rail-
roads,  reviving  a  Whig  economic  proposal  popular
among  midwestern  Democrats.  For  president,  the
Republicans  nominated  Colonel  John  C.  Frémont,  a
free-soiler  who  had  won  fame  in  the  conquest  of
Mexican California.

The Election of 1856  The American Party entered
the election with equally high hopes, but like the Whigs
and  Democrats,  it  split  along  sectional  lines  over
slavery.  The  southern  faction  of  the  American  Party
nominated  former  Whig  president  Millard  Fillmore,
while  the  northern  contingent  endorsed  Frémont.
During the campaign, the Republicans won the votes

of  many  northern  Know-Nothings  by  demanding
legislation banning foreign immigrants and imposing
high tariffs on foreign manufactures. As a Pennsylvania
Republican  put  it,  “Let  our  motto  be,  protection  to
everything  American,  against  everything  foreign.”  In
New York, Republicans campaigned on a reform plat-
form designed to unite “all of the Anti-Slavery, Anti-
Popery and Anti-Whiskey” voters.

The Democrats reaffirmed their support for popu-
lar sovereignty and the Kansas-Nebraska Act, and they
nominated  James  Buchanan  of  Pennsylvania.  A  tall,
dignified,  and  experienced  politician,  Buchanan  was
staunchly  prosouthern.  He  won  the  three-way  race
with 1.8 million popular votes (45.3 percent) and 174
electoral  votes.  Frémont  polled  1.3  million  popular
votes (33.2 percent) and 114 electoral votes; Fillmore
won 873,000 popular votes (21.5 percent) but captured
only 8 electoral votes.

The dramatic restructuring of the political system
was now apparent (Map 13.7). With the splintering of
the American Party, the Republicans had replaced the
Whigs  as  the  second  major  party.  However,  Frémont
had  not  won  a  single  vote  in  the  South;  had  he  tri-
umphed,  a  North  Carolina  newspaper  warned,  the
result would have been “a separation of the states.” The
fate  of  the  republic  hinged  on  President  Buchanan’s
ability  to  quiet  the  passions  of  the  past  decade  and
to  hold  the  Democratic  Party — the  only  national
party — together.

Dred Scott: Petitioner for Freedom  Events — and
his  own  values  and  weaknesses — conspired  against
Buchanan. Early in 1857, the Supreme Court decided
the  case  of  Dred  Scott  v.  Sandford,  which  raised  the
controversial issue of Congress’s constitutional author-
ity  over  slavery.  Dred  Scott  was  an  enslaved  African
American  who  had  lived  for  a  time  with  his  owner,
an army surgeon, in the free state of Illinois and at Fort
Snelling in the northern part of the Louisiana Purchase
(then  part  of  the  Wisconsin  Territory),  where  the
Missouri Compromise (1820) prohibited slavery. Scott
claimed that residence in a free state and a free terri-
tory  had  made  him  free.  Buchanan  opposed  Scott’s
appeal  and  pressured  the  two
justices  from  Pennsylvania  to
side  with  their  southern  col-
leagues. Seven of the nine justices
declared  that  Scott  was  still  a
slave,  but  they  disagreed  on  the
legal  rationale  (Thinking  Like  a
Historian, p. 434).

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
Why did northern Demo-
cratic presidents, such
as Pierce and Buchanan,
adopt prosouthern
policies?

