T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Biography as History

Sometimes the life of one individual can exemplify an era, and Bridget “Biddy”
Mason was such a person. Mason was born into slavery in Georgia in 1818, of
mixed African American and Native American descent. In 1836, her owner gave
Biddy, age eighteen, to his recently married cousins, Robert and Rebecca Smith,
who owned a Mississippi plantation. Trained as a midwife, Biddy delivered all six
of Rebecca’s babies as well as working in the ﬁelds. Biddy herself gave birth to
three daughters, probably fathered by Smith, as were at least two of her sister
Hannah’s eight children. In the mid-1840s, the Smiths converted to Mormonism
and, in 1847, along with other Mississippi converts and their slaves, journeyed
1,700 miles to the Utah Territory.

1.  Joseph Smith’s Plan to End Slavery, February 7,

3.  Mormon apostle Amasa Mason Lyman and his

wives. In 1851, at the behest of Brigham Young,
ﬁve hundred Mormons — including the Robert
Smiths and their slaves — moved to San Bernardino,
California. They settled on land purchased from
Antonio Maria Lugo, who held the 35,000 acres
of the Rancho Bernardino under a Mexican grant,
a claim protected by the Treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo (1848) that ended the Mexican War. The
settlement’s leader was Amasa Mason Lyman,
whom Biddy knew through the Smith family and
whose middle name she eventually took for her
surname.

1844. Like many Americans, members of the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints struggled with
the question of slavery. Running for president
in 1844, its founder, Joseph Smith, decried the
institution.

Petition, also, ye goodly inhabitants of the slave States,
your legislators to abolish slavery by the year 1850, or
now. . . . Pray Congress to pay every man a reasonable
price for his slaves out of the surplus revenue arising
from the sale of public lands, and from the deduction
of pay from the members of Congress. Break off the
shackles from the poor black man, and hire him to
labor like other human beings; for “an hour of virtuous
liberty on earth is worth a whole eternity of bondage.”

2.  Orson Hyde on slavery, the Millennial Star,

February 15, 1851. Orson Hyde was an impor-
tant Mormon missionary who, like most
Mormons, refused to baptize slaves without
their owner’s permission.

The laws of the land recognize slavery, we do not wish to
oppose the laws of the country. . . . Our counsel to all our
ministers in the North and South is, to avoid contention
upon the subject, and to oppose no institution which the
laws of the country authorize; but to labor to bring men
into the Church and Kingdom of God, and teach them
to do right, and honor their God in His creatures.

434

Source: George and Sadie Frey Family.

