4.  Mason v. Smith, 1856 (the Bridget “Biddy” Mason

case). Most Mormon migrants to California heeded
Brigham Young’s advice to free their slaves, as Cali-
fornia was a free state. Robert Smith refused to do
so and, in 1855, prepared to move to Texas. How-
ever, in 1856, members of the free black community
assisted Biddy to ﬁle a habeas corpus petition
and obtain freedom for herself and her extended
family of thirteen women and children. In a later
interview, Mason stated: “I feared this trip to
Texas since I ﬁrst heard of it.”

And it further appearing by satisfactory proof to the judge
here, that all of the said persons of color are entitled to
their freedom, and are free and cannot be held in slavery
or involuntary servitude . . . And it further appearing to
the satisfaction of the judge here that the said Robert
Smith intended to and is about to remove from the State
of California where slavery does not exist, to the State
of Texas, where slavery of Negroes and persons of color
does exist, and is established by the municipal laws, and
intends to remove the said before-mentioned persons of
color, to his own use without the free will and consent of
all or any of the said persons of color, whereby their lib-
erty will be greatly jeopardized, and there is good reason
to apprehend and believe that they may be sold into slav-
ery or involuntary servitude . . . and it further appearing
that none of the said persons of color can read and write,
and are almost entirely ignorant of the laws of the state
of California as well as those of the State of Texas, and of
their rights and that the said Robert Smith, from his past
relations to them as members of his family does possess
and exercise over them an undue influence in respect to
the matter of their said removal insofar that they have
been in duress and not in possession and exercise of
their free will so as to give a binding consent to any
engagement or arrangement with him.

5.  Photograph of Biddy Mason and the deed of her
first land purchase, 1866. Once free, Biddy pros-
pered as a midwife and an investor in Los Angeles
real estate. When she died in 1891, Biddy had accu-
mulated a fortune of $300,000 (about $7.6 million
today). Despite her contact with Mormonism, Biddy
Mason never joined the Mormon church. Instead,
in 1872 she was a founding member of the ﬁrst
African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church in Los
Angeles. An active philanthropist of charitable
causes, she funded a traveler’s aid society and an
elementary school for black children.

Source: Los Angeles Public Library.

Sources: (1) History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, Vol. VI (Salt Lake
City, UT: Mormon Church, 1912), 205; (2) The Latter-Day Saints’ Millennial Star, Vol.
XIII (Liverpool: Franklin D. Richards, 1851), 63; (4) Golden State Insurance Company
Records, UCLA, Dept. of Special Collections, Charles E. Young Research Library.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Were Smith’s and Hyde’s positions on slavery and prop-

erty rights (sources 1 and 2) similar or different?
2.  How might the set of photographs of Amasa Mason
Lyman and his wives (source 3) suggest that Mormon
family life resembled Biddy’s experience in growing up
on a southern plantation? How might it mirror her own
sexual experience, and that of her sister Hannah, as
Robert Smith’s slaves?

3.  As a slave, Biddy did not have a surname. Why might
have she taken Lyman’s middle name as her surname
when she became free in 1856?

4.  How does the ruling in Biddy’s case (source 4) by Judge
Benjamin Ignatius Hayes, in a California state court,
reﬂect the political and constitutional turmoil that west-
ward expansion created with regard to slavery? How
is this ruling similar to, and different from, the famous
case brought by Dred Scott in Missouri and decided
eventually by the U.S. Supreme Court in Dred Scott v.
Sandford (1857)?

5.  What do you think explains Biddy Mason’s religious

choices and charitable activities as described in the head-
note to source 5?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

List the main themes and arguments presented in Chapters
12 and 13. Then, write an essay that explores the ways in
which Biddy Mason’s experiences — plantation labor in
Georgia and Mississippi, coerced miscegenation, exposure
to the new religion of Mormonism, a trek by foot across a
continent, legally won emancipation, and entrepreneurial
success in formerly Mexican California — either exemplify or
are inconsistent with those themes and arguments.

435

