436

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

OREGON
TERRITORY

MEXICAN
CESSION,
1848

1848

UNORGANIZED
TERR.

4

5

4

23

9

12

12

13

6

9

10

7

3

6

INDIAN
TERRITORY

4

9

66

36

26

8

7
3

12

4

6

17

11

9

3

Candidate

Zachary Taylor
(Whig)

Lewis Cass
(Democrat)

Martin Van Buren
(Free-Soil)

Electoral
Vote

Popular
Vote

Percent of
Popular Vote

163

1,360,967

47.4

127

1,222,342

42.5

291,263

10.1

WASH.
TERR.

UNORG.
TERR.

4

NEBRASKA
TERR.

5

6

4

11

13

23

KANSAS
TERR.

INDIAN
TERR.

4

9

4

6

12

12

7

9

10

UTAH
TERRITORY

NEW MEXICO
TERRITORY

3

4

1860

8

55

13

4

6

4
3
3

35

27
8

15

10

8

3

Candidate
Abraham Lincoln
(Republican)

John C. Breckinridge
(Southern Democrat)

John Bell
(Constitutional Union)

Stephen A. Douglas
(Northern Democrat)

Electoral
Vote

Popular
Vote

Percent of
Popular Vote

180

1,865,593

72

39

12

848,356

592,906

1,382,713

39.8

18.1

12.6

29.5

MAP 13.7
Political Realignment, 1848 and 1860

In the presidential election of 1848, both the Whig and Democratic candidates won electoral votes
throughout the nation. Subsequently, the political conﬂict over slavery and the Compromise of
1850 destroyed the Whig Party in the South. As the only nationwide party, the Democrats won
easily over the Whigs in 1852 and, with the opposition split between the Republican and Amer ican
parties, triumphed in 1856 as well. However, a new region-based party system appeared by 1860
and persisted for the next seventy years — with Democrats dominant in the South and Republicans
usually controlling the Northeast, Midwest, and Far West.

Chief Justice Roger B. Taney of Maryland, a slave
owner  himself,  wrote  the  most  influential  opinion.
He  declared  that  Negroes,  whether  enslaved  or  free,
could not be citizens of the United States and that Scott
therefore  had  no  right  to  sue  in  federal  court.  That
argument was controversial, given that free blacks were
citizens in many states and therefore had access to the
federal courts. Taney then made two even more con-
troversial claims. First, he endorsed John C. Calhoun’s
argument that the Fifth Amendment, which prohibited
“taking” of property without due process of law, meant
that Congress could not prevent southern citizens from
moving  their  slave  property  into  the  territories  and
owning  it  there.  Consequently,  the  chief  justice  con-
cluded, the provisions of the Northwest Ordinance and
the Missouri Compromise that prohibited slavery had
never been constitutional. Second, Taney declared that
Congress could not give to territorial governments any
powers  that  it  did  not  possess,  such  as  the  authority
to prohibit slavery. Taney thereby endorsed Calhoun’s
interpretation of popular sovereignty: only when set-
tlers  wrote  a  constitution  and  requested  statehood
could they prohibit slavery.

In a single stroke, Taney had declared the Repub-
lican  proposals  to  restrict  the  expansion  of  slavery
through legislation to be unconstitutional. The Repub-
licans could never accept the legitimacy of Taney’s con-
stitutional  arguments,  which  indeed  had  significant
flaws. Led by Senator Seward of New York, they accused
the chief justice and President Buchanan of participat-
ing in the Slave Power conspiracy.

Buchanan  then  added  fuel  to  the  raging  constitu-
tional  fire.  Ignoring  reports  that  antislavery  residents
held a  clear majority in Kansas, he refused to allow a
popular vote on the proslavery Lecompton constitution
and in 1858 strongly urged Congress to admit Kansas as
a  slave  state.  Angered  by  Buchanan’s  machinations,
Stephen Douglas, the most influential Demo cratic sen-
ator  and  architect  of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Act,  broke
with  the  president  and  persuaded  Congress  to  deny
statehood to Kansas. (Kansas would enter the Union as
a free state in 1861.) Still determined to aid the South,
Buchanan  resumed  negotiations  to  buy  Cuba  in
December 1858. By pursuing a proslavery agenda — first
in Dred Scott and then in Kansas and Cuba — Buchanan
widened the split in his party and the nation.

