CHAPTER 13

  Expansion, War, and Sectional Crisis, 1844–1860

437

Abraham Lincoln and
the Republican Triumph,
1858–1860
As the Democratic Party split along sectional lines, the
Republicans gained support in the North and Midwest.
Abraham  Lincoln  of  Illinois  emerged  as  the  only
Republican  leader  whose  policies  and  temperament
might have saved the Union. However, few southerners
trusted Lincoln, and his presidential candidacy revived
secessionist agitation.

Lincoln’s Political Career
The  middle-class  world  of  storekeepers,  lawyers,  and
entrepreneurs  in  the  small  towns  of  the  Ohio  River
Valley  shaped  Lincoln’s  early  career.  He  came  from  a
hardscrabble yeoman farm family that was continually
on the move — from Kentucky, where Lincoln was born
in  1809,  to  Indiana,  and  then  to  Illinois.  In  1831,
Lincoln rejected his father’s life as a subsistence farmer
and  became  a  store  clerk  in  New  Salem,  Illinois.
Socially  ambitious,  Lincoln  won  entry  to  the  middle
class by mastering its culture; he joined the New Salem
Debating Society, read Shakespeare, and studied law.

Admitted  to  the  bar  in  1837,  Lincoln  moved  to
Springfield, the new state capital. There, he met Mary
Todd,  the  cultured  daughter  of  a  Kentucky  banker;
they married in 1842. Her tastes were aristocratic; his
were  humble.  She  was  volatile;  he  was  easygoing  but
suffered bouts of depression that tried her patience and
tested his character.

An  Ambitious  Politician  Lincoln’s  ambition  was
“a  little  engine  that  knew  no  rest,”  a  close  associate
remarked,  and  it  propelled  him  into  politics.  An
admirer of Henry Clay, Lincoln joined the Whig Party
and won election to four terms in the Illinois legisla-
ture, where he promoted education, banks, canals, and
railroads.  He  became  a  dexterous  party  politician,
adept  in  the  use  of  patronage  and  the  passage  of
legislation.

In  1846,  the  rising  lawyer-politician  won  election
to a Congress that was bitterly divided over the Wilmot
Proviso.  Lincoln  believed  that  human  bondage  was
unjust  but  doubted  that  the  federal  government  had
the  constitutional  authority  to  tamper  with  slavery.
With  respect  to  the  Mexican  War,  he  took  a  middle
ground by voting for military appropriations but also
for the Wilmot Proviso’s ban on slavery in any acquired
territories.  Lincoln  also  introduced  legislation  that

Abraham Lincoln, 1859

Lincoln was not a handsome man, and he photographed
poorly. His campaign managers had this photo — and many
others — retouched to soften Lincoln’s features. However,
no photograph, no matter how realistic, captured Lincoln’s
complex personality and wit or the intensity of his spirit and
intellect. To grasp Lincoln, it is necessary to read his words.
Chicago History Museum.

would  require  the  gradual  (and  thus  compensated)
emancipation of slaves in the District of Columbia. To
avoid  future  racial  strife,  he  favored  the  colonization
of  freed  blacks  in  Africa  or  South  America.  Both
abolitionists and proslavery activists heaped scorn on
Lincoln’s  middle-of-the-road  policies,  and  he  lost  his
bid  for  reelection.  Dismayed  by  the  rancor  of  ideo-
logical  debate,  he  withdrew  from  politics  and  pros-
pered  as  a  lawyer  by  representing  railroads  and
manufacturers.

Lincoln returned to the political fray because of the
Kansas-Nebraska  Act.  Shocked  by  the  act’s  repeal  of
the Missouri Compromise and Senator Douglas’s advo-
cacy  of  popular  sovereignty,  Lincoln  reaffirmed  his
opposition to slavery in the territories. He now likened
slavery to a cancer that had to be cut out if the nation’s
republican ideals and moral principles were to endure.

The  Lincoln-Douglas  Debates  Abandoning  the
Whigs,  Lincoln  quickly  emerged  as  the  leading
Republican in Illinois, and in 1858 he ran for the U.S.
Senate seat held by Douglas. Lincoln pointed out that

