438

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

the proslavery Supreme Court might soon declare that
the  Constitution  “does  not  permit  a  state  to  exclude
slavery,” just as it had decided in Dred Scott that “nei-
ther Congress nor the territorial legislature” could ban
slavery in a territory. In that event, he warned, “we shall
awake  to  the  reality . . . that  the  Supreme  Court  has
made  Illinois  a  slave  state.”  This  prospect  informed
Lincoln’s famous “House Divided” speech. Quoting the
biblical  adage  “A  house  divided  against  itself  cannot
stand,”  he  predicted  that  American  society  “cannot
endure permanently half slave and half free. . . . It will
become all one thing, or all the other.”

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
What was Lincoln’s posi-
tion on slavery and people
of African descent during
the 1840s and 1850s?

The Senate race in Illinois attracted national inter-
est because of Douglas’s prominence and Lincoln’s rep-
utation  as  a  formidable  speaker.  During  a  series  of
seven debates, Douglas declared his support for white
supremacy: “This government was made by our fathers,
by  white  men  for  the  benefit  of  white  men,”  he  said,
attacking  Lincoln  for  supporting  “negro  equality.”
Lincoln parried Douglas’s racist attacks by arguing that
free  blacks  should  have  equal
economic  opportunities  but  not
equal  political  rights.  Taking  the
offensive,  he  asked  how  Douglas
the  Dred  Scott
could  accept
decision  (which  protected  slave
property  in  the  territories)  yet
sovereignty
advocate  popular
(which  allowed  settlers  to  exclude  slavery).  Douglas
responded with the so-called Freeport Doctrine: that a
territory’s residents could exclude slavery by not adopt-
ing  laws  to  protect  it.  That  position  pleased  neither
proslavery  nor  antislavery  advocates.  Nonetheless,
when  Democrats  won  a  narrow  majority  in  the  state
legislature, they reelected Douglas to the U.S. Senate.

The Union Under Siege
The debates with Douglas gave Lincoln a national rep-
utation,  and  in  the  election  of  1858  the  Republican
Party won control of the U.S. House of Representatives.

The Rise of Radicalism  Shaken by the Republicans’
advance, southern Democrats divided again into mod-
erates and fire-eaters. The moderates, who included Sen-
ator Jefferson Davis of Mississippi, strongly defended
“southern rights” and demanded ironclad political or
constitutional protections for slavery. The fire-eaters —
men such as Robert Barnwell Rhett of South Carolina
and William Lowndes Yancey of Alabama — repudiated
the  Union  and  actively  promoted  secession.  Radical
antislavery northerners likewise took a strong stance.

Senator  Seward  of  New  York  declared  that  freedom
and  slavery  were  locked  in  “an  irrepressible  conflict,”
and ruthless abolitionist John Brown, who had perpe-
trated  the  Pottawatomie  massacre,  showed  what  that
might  mean.  In  October  1859,  Brown  led  eighteen
heavily  armed  black  and  white  men  in  a  raid  on  the
federal  arsenal  at  Harpers  Ferry,  Virginia.  Brown
hoped  to  arm  slaves  with  the  arsenal’s  weapons  and
mount a major rebellion to end slavery.

Republican leaders condemned Brown’s unsuccess-
ful  raid,  but  Democrats  called  his  plot  “a  natural,
logical, inevitable result of the doctrines and teachings
of  the  Republican  party.”  When  the  state  of  Virginia
sentenced  Brown  to  be  hanged,  transcendentalist
reformers  Henry  David  Thoreau  and  Ralph  Waldo
Emerson (Chapter 11) proclaimed him a “saint await-
ing his martyrdom.” The slaveholding states looked to
the  future  with  terror.  “The  aim  of  the  present  black
republican organization is the destruction of the social
system of the Southern States,” warned one newspaper.
Once Republicans came to power, another cautioned,
they “would create insurrection and servile war in the
South — they would put the torch to our dwellings and
the knife to our throats.”

Nor  could  the  South  count  any  longer  on  the
Demo cratic Party to protect its interests. At the party’s
convention in April 1860, northern Democrats rejected
Jefferson  Davis’s  proposal  to  protect  slavery  in  the
territories,  and  delegates  from  eight  southern  states
quit the meeting. At a second Democratic convention,
north ern  and  midwestern  delegates  nominated
Stephen  Douglas  for  president;  meeting  separately,
southern Democrats nominated the sitting vice presi-
dent, John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky.

The Election of 1860  With the Democrats divided,
the  Republicans  sensed  victory.  They  courted  white
voters  with  a  free-soil  platform  that  opposed  both
slavery  and  racial  equality:  “Missouri  for  white  men
and  white  men  for  Missouri,”  declared  that  state’s
Republican platform. The national Republican conven-
tion chose Lincoln as its presidential candidate because
he was more moderate on slavery than the best-known
Republicans,  Senators  William  Seward  of  New  York
and  Salmon  Chase  of  Ohio.  Lincoln  also  conveyed  a
compelling  egalitarian  image  that  appealed  to  small-
holding farmers, wage earners, and midwestern voters.
The Republican strategy worked. Although Lincoln
received less than 1 percent of the popular vote in the
South and only 40 percent of the national poll, he won
every  northern  and  western  state  except  New  Jersey,
giving him 180 (of 303) electoral votes and an absolute

