CHAPTER 13

  Expansion, War, and Sectional Crisis, 1844–1860

439

Lincoln on Home Base

Beginning in the 1820s, the language and imagery of sports penetrated politics, cutting across the lines of
class and party. Wielding a long, bat-like rail labeled “EQUAL RIGHTS AND FREE TERRITORY,” Abraham Lincoln holds
a baseball and appears ready to score a victory in the election. His three opponents — from left to right, John
Bell (the candidate of a new Constitutional Union Party), Stephen A. Douglas, and John C. Breckinridge —
will soon be “out.” Indeed, according to the pro-Lincoln cartoonist, they were about to be “skunk’d.” As
Douglas laments, their attempt to put a “short stop” to Lincoln’s presidential ambitions had failed. Museum
of American Political Life.

majority  in  the  electoral  college.  Breckinridge  took
72  electoral  votes  by  sweeping  the  Deep  South  and
picking up Delaware, Maryland, and North Carolina.
Douglas  won  30  percent  of  the  popular  ballot  but
secured  only  51  electoral  votes  in  Missouri  and  New
Jersey.  The  Republicans  had  united  voters  in  the
Northeast, Midwest, and Pacific coast behind free soil.
A  revolution  was  in  the  making.  “Oh  My  God!!!
This morning heard that Lincoln was elected,” Keziah
Brevard, a widowed South Carolina plantation mistress
and  owner  of  two  hundred  slaves,  scribbled  in  her
diary.  “Lord  save  us.”  Slavery  had  permeated  the

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What was the relationship
between the collapse of
the Second Party System
and the Republican victory
in the election of 1860?

federal  republic  so
American
thoroughly  that  southerners  saw
it as a natural part of the constitu-
tional  order — an  order  that  was
now  under  siege.  Fearful  of  a
massive  black  uprising,  Chief
Justice  Taney  recalled  “the  hor-
rors  of  St.  Domingo  [Haiti].”  At
the  very  least,  warned  John  Townsend  of  South
Carolina, a Republican administration in Washington
would suppress “the inter-State slave trade” and thereby
“cripple  this  vital  Southern  institution  of  slavery.”  To

