440

PART 5

  CHAPTER REVIEW

many  southerners,  it  seemed  time  to  think  carefully
about  Lincoln’s  1858  statement  that  the  Union  must
“become all one thing, or all the other.”

To see a longer excerpt of Keziah Brevard’s diary,
along with other primary sources from this period,
see Sources for America’s History.

SUMMARY
In this chapter, we examined four related themes: the
ideology of Manifest Destiny and the westward move-
ment of Americans in the 1840s, the impact of Ameri-
can  traders  and  settlers  on  the  Indian  peoples  of
the Great Plains and California, the causes and conse-
quences  of  the  Mexican  War  (1846–1848),  and  the
disintegration  of  the  Second  Party  System  during
the 1850s.

We saw that the determination of Presidents John
Tyler and James Polk to add territory and slave states to
the Union pushed the United States into the Mexican
War and into a new debate over the expansion of slav-
ery. To resolve the resulting crisis, Henry Clay, Daniel
Webster, and Stephen Douglas devised the Compromise
of 1850. Their efforts were in vain: antislavery north-
erners defied the Fugitive Slave Act, and expansionist-
minded  southerners  sought  new  slave  states  in  the
Caribbean. Ideology (the pursuit of absolutes) replaced
politics (the art of compromise) as the ruling principle
of American political life.

The Second Party System rapidly disintegrated. The
Whig Party vanished, and two issue-oriented parties,
the  nativist  American  Party  and  the  antislavery
Republican  Party,  competed  for  its  members.  As  the
Republicans  gained  strength,  the  Democratic  Party
splintered into sectional factions over Bleeding Kansas
and other slavery-related issues. The stage was set for
Lincoln’s victory in the climactic election of 1860.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

Manifest Destiny (p. 412)
Californios (p. 415)
“Fifty-four forty or fight!”

(p. 418)

conscience Whigs (p. 421)
Wilmot Proviso (p. 421)
free-soil movement (p. 421)
squatter sovereignty (p. 424)
forty-niners (p. 425)
“slavery follows the flag” (p. 428)

Compromise of 1850 (p. 429)
personal-liberty laws (p. 431)
Gadsden Purchase (p. 431)
Ostend Manifesto (p. 431)
Kansas-Nebraska Act (p. 432)
American, or Know-Nothing,

Party (p. 432)

“Bleeding Kansas” (p. 433)
Dred Scott v. Sandford (p. 433)
Freeport Doctrine (p. 438)

Key People

James K. Polk (p. 418)
Frederick Douglass (p. 421)
Zachary Taylor (p. 424)
Lewis Cass (p. 424)
Stephen Douglas (p. 431)
Harriet Beecher Stowe (p. 431)
John Brown (p. 433)
Abraham Lincoln (p. 437)

