CHAPTER 13

  CHAPTER REVIEW

441

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  In what specific ways did the ideology of Manifest
Destiny  influence  events  during  the  1840s  and
1850s?

2.  What were the main constitutional arguments pre-
sented during the debate over slavery in the territo-
ries?  Which  of  those  arguments  influenced  Chief
Justice Taney’s opinion in Dred Scott?

3.  How  did  the  Compromise  of  1850,  the  Kansas-
Nebraska Act, and the Dred Scott decision seek to

address the issue of slavery, and what was the effect
of each of them on sectional conflicts?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Some  histo-
rians claim that the mistakes of a “blundering gen-
eration”  of  political  leaders  led,  by  1860,  to  the
imminent breakup of the Union. Using the events
from “Politics and Power” on the thematic timeline
on page 409, explain why you agree or disagree.

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  How  were  the
American territorial acquisitions of the 1840s simi-
lar to, and/or different from, those of the Louisiana
Purchase and the Paris Treaty of 1783 (discussed in
Chapters 6 and 7)?

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  In  American  Progress
(p.  411),  why  does  John  Gast  choose  Liberty  to
lead the republic westward? How does he interpret
the American experience, and what stories does he
tell  in  the  image’s  foreground,  middle  ground,
and  background?  How  does  the  evidence  in  the
chapter challenge Gast’s interpretation of westward
expansion?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Eric Foner, Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men (1970). Still
offers the best analysis of the ideology of the Republi-
can Party.

Leonard L. Richards, The Slave Power: The Free North
and Southern Domination, 1780–1860 (2000). Offers a
broad cultural analysis.

Patricia Nelson Limerick, The Legacy of Conquest
(1989). Highlights social conflicts in the West.

William A. Link, Roots of Secession (2003). A good
state-focused study about the causes of secession.

Stephen Oates, With Malice Toward None (1977).
A classic biography about Lincoln.

The PBS documentary The West and its Web site (pbs
.org/weta/thewest) offer a comprehensive history of
the West, and the PBS Web site on the U.S.-Mexican
War: 1846–1848 (pbs.org/usmexicanwar) covers
both American and Mexican perspectives of this
pivotal event.

