Two Societies at War
1861–1865

What a scene it was,” Union sol-

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
How  did  the  military  and  political
goals  of  the  war  bring  significant
changes  to  social,  economic,  and
cultural life?

dier Elisha Hunt Rhodes wrote
in  his  diary  at  Gettysburg  in
July 1863. “Oh the dead and the dying on
this bloody ﬁeld.” Thousands of men had
already died, and the slaughter would con-
tinue for two more years. “Why is it that 200,000 men of one blood and tongue . . . [are]
seeking  one  another’s  lives?”  asked  Confederate  lieutenant  R.  M.  Collins  as  another
gruesome battle ended. “We could settle our differences by compromising and all be at
home in ten days.” But there was no compromise. “God wills this contest, and wills that
it shall not yet end,” President Abraham Lincoln reﬂected. “The Almighty has His own
purposes.”

While the reasons for the war are complex, racial slavery played a primary role. To
southern whites, the Republican victory in 1860 presented an immediate danger to the
slave-owning  republic  that  had  existed  since  1776.  “[O]ur  struggle  is  for  inherited
rights,”  declared  one  southern  leader.  Southerners  did  not  believe  Lincoln  when  he
promised  not  “directly  or  indirectly,  to  interfere  with  the  institution  of  slavery  in  the
States where it exists.” Soon, a southern senator warned, “cohorts of Federal ofﬁce-
holders,  Abolitionists,  may  be  sent  into  [our]  midst”  to  encourage  slave  revolts  and,
even worse, racial mixture. By racial mixture, white southerners meant sexual relations
between black men and white women, given that white masters had already fathered
untold thousands of children by their enslaved black women. “Better, far better! [to]
endure all horrors of civil war,” insisted a Confederate recruit, “than to see the dusky
sons of Ham leading the fair daughters of the South to the altar.” To preserve black
subordination and white supremacy, radical southerners chose the dangerous enterprise
of secession.

Lincoln and the North would not let them go in peace. Living in a world still ruled by
monarchies, northern leaders believed that the collapse of the American Union might
forever  destroy  the  possibility  of  democratic  republican  governments.  “We  cannot
escape history,” Lincoln eloquently declared. “We shall nobly save, or meanly lose, the
last best hope of earth.”

And so came the conﬂict. Called the War Between the States by southerners and
the War of the Rebellion by northerners, the struggle ﬁnally resolved the great issues of
the Union and slavery. The costs were terrible: more American lives lost than the com-
bined  total  for  all  the  nation’s  other  wars,  and  a  century-long  legacy  of  bitterness
between the triumphant North and the vanquished white South.

14

C H A P T E R

SECESSION AND
MILITARY STALEMATE,
1861–1862

The Secession Crisis

The Upper South Chooses Sides

Setting War Objectives and

Devising Strategies

TOWARD TOTAL WAR

Mobilizing Armies and Civilians

Mobilizing Resources

THE TURNING POINT:
1863

Emancipation

Vicksburg and Gettysburg

THE UNION
VICTORIOUS, 1864–1865

Soldiers and Strategy

The Election of 1864 and

Sherman’s March

444

