446

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

Secession and Military
Stalemate, 1861–1862
Following Lincoln’s election in November 1860, seces-
sionist fervor swept through the Deep South. Veteran
party  leaders  in  Washington  still  hoped  to  save  the
Union. In the four months between Lincoln’s election
and his inauguration on March 4, 1861, they sought a
new compromise.

The Secession Crisis
The Union collapsed first in South Carolina, the home
of John C. Calhoun, nullification, and southern rights.
Robert  Barnwell  Rhett  and  other  fire-eaters  had
demanded  secession  since  the  Compromise  of  1850,
and their goal was now within reach. “Our enemies are
about to take possession of the Government,” warned
one  South  Carolinian.  Frightened  by  that  prospect,  a
state convention voted unanimously on December 20,
1860,  to  dissolve  “the  union  now  subsisting  between
South Carolina and other States.”

The Lower South Secedes  Fire-eaters elsewhere in
the Deep South quickly called similar conventions and
organized  mobs  to  attack  local  Union  supporters.  In
early January, white Mississippians joyously enacted a
secession  ordinance,  and  Florida,  Alabama,  Georgia,
and  Louisiana  quickly  followed.  Texans  soon  joined
them,  ousting  Unionist  governor  Sam  Houston  and
ignoring  his  warning  that  “the  North . . . will  over-
whelm the South” (Map 14.1). In February, the jubilant
secessionists  met  in  Montgomery,  Alabama,  to  pro-
claim a new nation: the Confederate States of America.
Adopting  a  provisional  constitution,  the  delegates
named  Mississippian  Jefferson  Davis,  a  former  U.S.
senator and secretary of war, as the Confederacy’s pres-
ident and Georgia congressman Alexander Stephens as
vice president.

Secessionist  fervor  was  less  intense  in  the  four
states of the Middle South (Virginia, North Carolina,
Tennessee,  and  Arkansas),  where  there  were  fewer
slaves. White opinion was especially divided in the four
border  slave  states  (Maryland,  Delaware,  Kentucky,
and  Missouri),  where  yeomen  farmers  held  greater
political power and, from bitter experience as well as
the writings of journalist Hilton Helper, knew that all
too often “the slaveholders . . . have hoodwinked you.”
Reflecting such sentiments, the legislatures of Virginia
and  Tennessee  refused  to  join  the  secessionist  move-
ment and urged a compromise.

Alabama Secession Flag

In January 1861, a Secession Convention in Alabama voted
to leave the Union and marked their decision for indepen-
dence by designating this pennant — created by a group of
Montgom ery women — as their ofﬁcial ﬂag. Like John Gast’s
American Progress (p. 411), the Goddess of Liberty forms the
central image. Here she holds a sword and a ﬂag with a single
star, symbolizing Alabama’s new status as an independent
republic. Alabama Department of Archives and History.

Meanwhile,  the  Union  government  floundered.
President Buchanan declared secession illegal but — in
line  with  his  states’  rights  outlook — claimed  that  the
federal  government  lacked  authority  to  restore  the
Union  by  force.  Buchanan’s  timidity  prompted  South
Carolina’s  new  government  to  demand  the  surrender
of  Fort  Sumter  (a  federal  garrison  in  Charleston
Harbor) and to cut off its supplies. The president again
backed  down,  refusing  to  use  the  navy  to  supply  the
fort.

The Crittenden Compromise
Instead, the outgoing
president  urged  Congress  to  find  a  compromise.  The
plan  proposed  by  Senator  John  J.  Crittenden  of
Kentucky  received  the  most  support.  The  Crittenden
Compromise had two parts. The first, which Congress
approved,  called  for  a  constitutional  amendment  to
protect  slavery  from  federal  interference  in  any  state
where it already existed. Crittenden’s second provision
called  for  the  westward  extension  of  the  Missouri
Compromise  line  (36°30'  north  latitude)  to  the  Cali-
fornia border. The provision would ban slavery north
of the line and allow bound labor to the south, includ-
ing  any  territories  “hereafter  acquired,”  raising  the
prospect of expansion into Cuba or Central Amer ica.
Congressional  Republicans  rejected  Crittenden’s  sec-
ond  proposal  on  strict  instructions  from  president-
elect  Lincoln.  With  good  reason,  Lincoln  feared  it

