CHAPTER 14

  Two Societies at War, 1861–1865

447

N.Y.

CONN.

PENNSYLVANIA

N.J.
MD. DEL.

VIRGINIA
8

N

W

E

S

NORTH CAROLINA
11

The numbers show the
chronological sequence
of secession of the
Confederate states. Did a
state’s place in the sequence
reflect the unanimity of
its vote?

NEBRASKA TERRITORY

UNORG.
TERR.

The states colored orange practiced slavery
before and during the Civil War but did not
secede from the Union. Why? Was it the presence
of federal troops? Or was it because there were
relatively few slaves (and slaveholders) in those
states?

MINN.

WIS.

MICHIGAN

This map records the votes
for and against secession in
each county or parish.

IOWA

ILLINOIS

INDIANA

OHIO

UTAH
TERR.

KANSAS TERRITORY

MISSOURI

NEW MEXICO
TERRITORY

INDIAN
TERRITORY

ARKANSAS

9

KENTUCKY

TENNESSEE
10

SOUTH
CAROLINA
1

GEORGIA

MISS.

2

ALABAMA
4

5

TEXAS
7

6

LOUISIANA

FLORIDA

3

M E X I C O

0

0

200

400 miles

200

400 kilometers

MAP 14.1
The Process of Secession, 1860–1861

For secession
Against secession
Delegation divided
No returns
Border states that
did not secede

1

Numbers indicate
order of secession

Northern limit of secession
before Ft. Sumter

Northern limit of secession
after Ft. Sumter

The states of the Lower South had the highest concentration of slaves, and they led the secessionist
movement. After the attack on Fort Sumter in April 1861, the states of the Upper South joined
the Confederacy. Yeomen farmers in Tennessee and the backcountry of Alabama, Georgia, and
Virginia opposed secession but, except in the future state of West Virginia, initially rallied to
the Confederate cause. Consequently, the South entered the Civil War with its white population
relatively united.

would  unleash  new  imperialist  adventures.  “I  want
Cuba,”  Senator  Albert  G.  Brown  of  Mississippi  had
candidly  stated  in  1858.  “I  want  Tamaulipas,  Potosi,
and one or two other Mexican States . . . for the plant-
ing or spreading of slavery.” In 1787, 1821, and 1850,
the  North  and  South  had  resolved  their  differences
over slavery. In 1861, there would be no compromise.
In his March 1861 inaugural address, Lincoln care-
fully outlined his positions. He promised to safeguard
slavery where it existed but vowed to prevent its expan-
sion.  Equally  important,  the  Republican  president
declared that the Union was “perpetual”; consequently,
the  secession  of  the  Confederate  states  was  illegal.
Lincoln  asserted  his  intention  to  “hold,  occupy,  and
possess” federal property in the seceded states and “to

collect duties and imposts” there. If military force was
necessary  to  preserve  the  Union,  Lincoln — like
Democrat Andrew Jackson during the nullification cri-
sis — would use it. The choice was the South’s: Return
to the Union, or face war.

The Upper South Chooses Sides
The South’s decision came quickly. When Lincoln dis-
patched  an  unarmed  ship  to  resupply  Fort  Sumter,
Jefferson  Davis  and  his  associates  in  the  Provisional
Government of the Confederate States decided to seize
the fort. The Confederate forces opened fire on April
12,  with  ardent  fire-eater  Edmund  Ruffin  supposedly
firing  the  first  cannon.  Two  days  later,  the  Union

