448

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
How important was the
conﬂict at Fort Sumter, and
would the Confederacy —
or the Union — have gone
to war without it?

defenders  capitulated.  On  April
15,  Lincoln  called  75,000  state
militiamen into federal service for
ninety days to put down an insur-
rection  “too  powerful  to  be  sup-
pressed by the ordinary course of
judicial proceedings.”
Northerners

responded

to
Lincoln’s call to arms with wild enthusiasm. Asked to
provide  thirteen  regiments  of  volunteers,  Republican
governor William Dennison of Ohio sent twenty. Many
northern  Demo crats  also  lent  their  support.  “Every
man  must  be  for  the  United  States  or  against  it,”
Democratic  leader  Stephen  Douglas  declared.  “There
can be no neutrals in this war, only patriots — or trai-
tors.” How then could the Democratic Party function
as  a  “loyal  opposition,”  supporting  the  Union  while
challenging certain Republican policies? It would not
be an easy task.

Whites in the Middle and Border South now had to
choose between the Union and the Confederacy, and
their decision was crucial. Those eight states accounted
for two-thirds of the whites in the slaveholding states,
three-fourths of their industrial production, and well
over  half  of  their  food.  They  were  home  to  many  of
the  nation’s  best  military  leaders,  including  Colonel
Robert E. Lee of Virginia, a career officer whom vet-
eran General Winfield Scott recommended to Lincoln
to  lead  the  new  Union  army.  Those  states  were  also
geographically  strategic.  Kentucky,  with  its  500-mile
border on the Ohio River, was essential to the move-
ment of troops and supplies. Maryland was vital to the
Union’s security because it bordered the nation’s capital
on three sides.

The weight of its history as a slave-owning society
decided the outcome in Virginia. On April 17, 1861, a
convention approved secession by a vote of 88 to 55,
with the dissenters concentrated in the state’s yeomen-
dominated northwestern counties. Elsewhere, Virginia
whites  embraced  the  Confederate  cause.  “The  North
was the aggressor,” declared Richmond lawyer William
Poague as he enlisted. “The South resisted her invad-
ers.” Refusing General Scott’s offer of the Union com-
mand,  Robert  E.  Lee  resigned  from  the  U.S.  Army.
“Save  in  defense  of  my  native
state,”  Lee  told  Scott,  “I  never
desire  again  to  draw  my  sword.”
Arkansas,  Tennessee,  and  North
Carolina  quickly  joined  Virginia
in the Confederacy.

Lincoln  moved  aggressively
to  hold  strategic  areas  where

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Per Figure 14.1, was slave
ownership in a state the
main cause of early seces-
sion? What other factors
drove the secession move-
ment?

Original Confederate states
Confederate border states
Union border states

Whites who are members
of slave-owning families

Share of population
who are slaves

38%

24%

14%

47%

32%

15%

FIGURE 14.1
Slavery and Secession

As the pie charts indicate, slave labor dominated the
economies of the Confederate states that initially
seceded from the Union, but it was much less impor-
tant in Confederate states further to the north that
seceded later.

relatively  few  whites  owned  slaves  (Figure  14.1).  To
secure the railway line connecting Washington to the
Ohio  River  Valley,  the  president  ordered  General
George  B.  McClellan  to  take  control  of  northwestern
Virginia.  In  October  1861,  yeomen  there  voted  over-
whelmingly  to  create  a  breakaway  territory,  West
Virginia.  Unwilling  to  “act  like  madmen  and  cut  our
own  throats  merely  to  sustain . . . a  most  unwarrant-
able  rebellion,”  West  Virginia  joined  the  Union  in
1863.  Unionists  also  carried  the  day  in  Delaware.  In
Maryland,  where  slavery  was  still  entrenched,  a  pro-
Confederate mob attacked Massachusetts troops trav-
eling through Baltimore, causing the war’s first combat
deaths: four soldiers and twelve civilians. When Mary-
land secessionists destroyed railroad bridges and tele-
graph lines, Lincoln ordered Union troops to occupy
the state and arrest Confederate sympathizers, includ-
ing  legislators.  He  released  them  only  in  November
1861, after Unionists had secured control of Maryland’s
government.

Lincoln  was  equally  energetic  in  the  Mississippi
River Valley. To win control of Missouri (and the adja-
cent  Missouri  and  Upper  Mississippi  rivers),  Lincoln
mobilized the state’s German American militia, which
strongly opposed slavery. In July, the German Ameri-
cans defeated a force of Confederate sympathizers com-
manded  by  the  state’s  governor.  Despite  continuing

