raids by Confederate guerrilla bands, which included
the notorious outlaws Jesse and Frank James, the Union
retained control of Missouri.

In Kentucky, where secessionist and Unionist senti-
ment was evenly balanced, Lincoln moved cautiously.
He  allowed  Kentucky’s  thriving  trade  with  the
Confederacy  to  continue  until  August  1861,  when
Unionists  took  over  the  state  government.  When  the
Confederacy responded to the trade cutoff by invading
Kentucky  in  September,  Illinois  volunteers  com-
manded by Ulysses S. Grant drove them out. Mixing
military  force  with  political  persuasion,  Lincoln  had
kept four border states (Delaware, Maryland, Missouri,
and  Kentucky)  and  the  northwestern  portion  of
Virginia in the Union.

Setting War Objectives
and Devising Strategies
Speaking as provisional president of the Confederacy
in  April  1861,  Jefferson  Davis  identified  the  Con-
federates’ cause with that of the Patriots of 1776: like
their  grandfathers,  he  said,  white  southerners  were
fighting for the “sacred right of self-government.” The
Confederacy  sought  “no  conquest,  no  aggrandize-
ment . . . ; all we ask is to be let alone.” Davis’s renunci-
ation of expansion was probably a calculated short-run
policy; after all, the quest to extend slavery into Kansas
and  Cuba  had  sparked  Lincoln’s  election.  Still,  this
decision simplified the Confederacy’s military strategy;
it  needed  only  to  defend  its  boundaries  to  achieve
independence.  Ignoring  strong  antislavery  sentiment
among  potential  European  allies,  the  Confederate
constitution explicitly ruled out gradual emancipation
or  any  other  law  “denying  or  impairing  the  right  of
property  in  negro  slaves.”  Indeed,  Confederate  vice
president Alexander Stephens insisted that his nation’s
“cornerstone  rests  upon  the  great  truth  that  the
Negro  is  not  equal  to  the  white  man,  that  slavery —
subordination to the superior race — is his natural or
normal condition.”

Lincoln responded to Davis in a speech to Congress
on July 4, 1861. He portrayed secession as an attack on
representative  government,  America’s  great  contribu-
tion to world history. The issue, Lincoln declared, was
“whether  a  constitutional  republic”  had  the  will  and
the means to “maintain its territorial integrity against
a  domestic  foe.”  Determined  to  crush  the  rebellion,
Lincoln  rejected  General  Winfield  Scott’s  strategy  of
peaceful persuasion through economic sanctions and a
naval  blockade.  Instead,  he  insisted  on  an  aggressive
military campaign to restore the Union.

CHAPTER 14

  Two Societies at War, 1861–1865

449

Union  Thrusts  Toward  Richmond  Lincoln  hoped
that  a  quick  strike  against  the  Confederate  capital  of
Richmond,  Virginia,  would  end  the  rebellion.  Many
northerners were equally optimistic. “What a  picnic,”
thought one New York volunteer, “to go down South
for  three  months  and  clean  up  the  whole  business.”
So  in  July  1861,  Lincoln  ordered  General  Irvin
McDowell’s  army  of  30,000  men  to  attack  General
P. G. T. Beauregard’s force of 20,000 troops at Manas-
sas,  a  Virginia  rail  junction  30  miles  southwest  of
Washington. McDowell launched a strong assault near
Bull  Run,  but  panic  swept  his  troops  when  the  Con-
federate  soldiers  counterattacked,  shouting  the  hair-
raising “rebel yell.” “The peculiar corkscrew sensation
that  it  sends  down  your  backbone . . . can  never  be
told,”  one  Union  veteran  wrote.  “You  have  to  feel  it.”
McDowell’s troops — and the many civilians who had
come  to  observe  the  battle — retreated  in  disarray  to
Washington.

COMPARE
AND CONTRAST
In 1861 and 1862, what
were the political and
military strategies of the
Confederate and Union
leaders? Which side was
the more successful and
why?

The  Confederate  victory  at  Bull  Run  showed  the
strength of the rebellion. Lincoln replaced McDowell
with General George McClellan and enlisted a million
men to serve for three years in the new Army of the
Potomac. A cautious military engineer, McClellan spent
the winter of 1861–1862 training
the recruits and launched a major
offensive  in  March  1862.  With
great  logistical  skill,  the  Union
general  ferried  100,000  troops
down  the  Potomac  River  to  the
Chesapeake Bay and landed them
on  the  peninsula  between  the
York and James rivers (Map 14.2).
Ignoring  Lincoln’s  advice
to
“strike a blow” quickly, McClellan
advanced  slowly  toward  Richmond,  allowing  the
Confederates  to  mount  a  counterstrike.  Thomas  J.
“Stonewall” Jackson marched a Confederate force rap-
idly  northward  through  the  Shenandoah  Valley  in
western  Virginia  and  threatened  Washington.  When
Lincoln recalled 30,000 troops from McClellan’s army
to protect the Union capital, Jackson returned quickly
to Richmond to bolster General Robert E. Lee’s army.
In  late  June,  Lee  launched  a  ferocious  six-day  attack
that cost 20,000 casualties to the Union’s 10,000. When
McClellan  failed  to  exploit  the  Confederates’  losses,
Lincoln ordered a withdrawal and Richmond remained
secure.

Lee  Moves  North: Antietam  Hoping for victories
that would humiliate Lincoln’s government, Lee went
on  the  offensive.  Joining  with  Jackson  in  northern

