450

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

In September 1862, Union forces halted the
Confederate invasion of Maryland with victories
 at South Mountain and Antietam (11 and 12).

12

Antietam
Sept. 17, 1862

(cid:3)

11
South Mountain
Sept. 14, 1862

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

Frederick

(cid:2)

(cid:4)
Harpers
Ferry

(cid:2)

MARYLAND

(cid:4)
Baltimore

PotomacR.

(cid:3)

(cid:5)

Washington, D.C.

1

Bull Run July 21, 1861
Aug. 29ñ30, 1862
10

The only major battle
of 1861 — Bull Run —
took place about 30 miles
southwest of the Union’s
capital. It left both armies
in disarray.

WEST VIRGINIA
(1863)

To relieve pressure on Richmond,
Confederate troops under General
Stonewall Jackson made a run up
the Shenandoah Valley, threatening
Washington (4, 5, and 7).

4
McDowell
May 8, 1862

(cid:3)

Cross Keys
June 8, 1862
7

(cid:3)

W

N

S

E

5

Winchester
May 25, 1862

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

ShenandoahR.

(cid:3)

M

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
E

.

S

T

G

D

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

I

R

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

E

U

L

B

(cid:3)

Cedar Mt.
Aug. 9, 1862
9

(cid:3)

13
Fredericksburg
Dec. 13, 1862

At Fredericksburg (13) in December 1862,
Confederate forces repulsed another Union
thrust into the heart of Virginia.

0

0

20

40 miles

20

40 kilometers

Assisted by Jackson’s attacks, Lee repulsed
the Union assault on Richmond and then
advanced toward Washington. After another
Confederate victory in the Second Battle of
Bull Run (10) in August 1862, Lee’s army
moved into Maryland.

Rappahannock

R.

Fair Oaks
May 31ñJune 1, 1862

6

Union Movements

Confederate Movements

McDowell

McClellan

FrÈmont

Banks

Shields

Pope

Burnside

(cid:2)

(cid:2) (cid:2)

(cid:3)

Union victory

Johnston

Holmes

Jackson

Lee

Confederate
victory

Railroad

Sequence of
battles

(cid:3)

1

MAP 14.2
The Eastern Campaigns of 1862

VIRGINIA

Richmond

(cid:5)

(cid:3) (cid:3)

8

Seven Days
June 25ñJuly 1, 1862

York
R.

JamesR.

(cid:3)
Williamsburg
May 5, 1862

3

To help you to follow the sequence of
the major battles of the eastern
campaigns of 1862, each battle is
dated and its place in the chronology
denoted by a number in a circle.

(cid:4)
Ft. Monroe

The Peninsular Campaign
(2 and 3; 6 and 8) began in
May 1862 as an attempt by the
Union armies to take Richmond
by moving up the peninsula
between the James and York rivers.

C
h
e
s
a
p
e
a
k
e

2
Siege of
Yorktown
Apr. 5ñMay 4,
1862

(cid:3)

B
a
y

Many of the great battles of the Civil War took place in the 125 miles separating the Union capi-
tal, Washington, D.C., and the Confederate capital, Richmond, Virginia. During 1862, Confederate
generals Thomas Jonathan “Stonewall” Jackson and Robert E. Lee won battles that defended
the Confederate capital (3, 6, 8, and 13) and launched offensive strikes against Union forces
guarding Washington (1, 4, 5, 7, 9, and 10). They also suffered a defeat — at Antietam (12), in
Maryland — that was almost fatal to the Confederate cause. As was often the case in the Civil
War, the victors in these battles were either too bloodied or too timid to exploit their advantage.

Virginia, he routed Union troops in the Second Battle
of  Bull  Run  (August  1862)  and  then  struck  north
through western Maryland. There, he nearly met with
disaster.  When  the  Confederate  commander  divided
his force, sending Jackson to capture Harpers Ferry in

West Virginia, a copy of Lee’s orders fell into McClellan’s
hands.  The  Union  general  again  failed  to  exploit  his
advantage,  delaying  an  attack  against  Lee’s  depleted
army, thereby allowing it to secure a strong defensive
position  west  of  Antietam  Creek,  near  Sharpsburg,

