CHAPTER 14

  Two Societies at War, 1861–1865

451

Maryland. Outnumbered 87,000 to 50,000, Lee desper-
ately  fought  off  McClellan’s  attacks  until  Jackson’s
troops  arrived  and  saved  the  Confederates  from  a
major  defeat.  Appalled  by  the  Union  casualties,
McClellan allowed Lee to retreat to Virginia.

The fighting at Antietam was savage. A Wisconsin
officer  described  his  men  “loading  and  firing  with
demoniacal  fury  and  shouting  and  laughing  hysteri-
cally.” A sunken road — nicknamed Bloody Lane — was
filled with Confederate bodies two and three deep, and
the  advancing  Union  troops  knelt  on  this  “ghastly
flooring” to shoot at the retreating Confederates. The
battle at Antietam on September 17, 1862, remains the
bloodiest single day in U.S. military history. Together,

the Confederate and Union dead numbered 4,800 and
the  wounded  18,500,  of  whom  3,000  soon  died.  (By
comparison, there were 6,000 American casualties on
D-Day,  which  began  the  invasion  of  Nazi-occupied
France in World War II.)

In  public,  Lincoln  claimed  Antietam  as  a  Union
victory; privately, he criticized McClellan for not fight-
ing Lee to the bitter end. A masterful organizer of men
and supplies, McClellan refused to risk his troops, fear-
ing that heavy casualties would undermine public sup-
port  for  the  war.  Lincoln  worried  more  about  the
danger of a lengthy war. He dismissed McClellan and
began  a  long  search  for  an  aggressive  commanding
general. His first choice, Ambrose E. Burnside, proved

The Battle of Pea Ridge, Arkansas, March 1862

Pea Ridge was the biggest battle of the Civil War fought west of the Mississippi and was of considerable
strategic signiﬁcance. By routing one Confederate army and holding another to a draw, outnumbered
Union forces maintained their control of Missouri for the duration of the war. The lithograph, published in
Chicago in 1889, commemorates the Union units — from Illinois and other midwestern states — who fought
at Pea Ridge. Here the Union troops, half of whom were German immigrants, face a charging column of
Confederate cavalry and infantry from Texas and Missouri and their Native American allies. Each side had
about 1,000 men killed or wounded, with another 200 taken prisoner. Library of Congress.

