452

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

to be more daring but less competent than McClellan.
In December, after heavy losses in futile attacks against
well-entrenched Confederate forces at Fredericksburg,
Virginia, Burnside resigned his command, and Lincoln
replaced  him  with  Joseph  “Fighting  Joe”  Hooker.  As
1862  ended,  Confederates  were  optimistic:  they  had
won a stalemate in the East.

The  War  in  the  Mississippi  Valley  Meanwhile,
Union commanders in the Upper South had been more
successful  (Map  14.3).  Their  goal  was  to  control  the
Ohio,  Mississippi,  and  Missouri  rivers,  dividing  the
Confederacy and reducing the mobility of its armies.
Because Kentucky did not join the rebellion, the Union
already dominated the Ohio River Valley. In February
1862, the Union army used an innovative tactic to take
charge of the Tennessee and Mississippi rivers as well.
General Ulysses S. Grant used riverboats clad with iron
plates  to  capture  Fort  Donelson  on  the  Cumberland
River and Fort Henry on the Tennessee River. When
Grant moved south toward Mississippi to seize critical
railroad lines, Confederate troops led by Albert Sidney
Johnston and P. G. T. Beauregard caught his army by
surprise near a small log church at Shiloh, Tennessee.
However,  Grant  relentlessly  committed  troops  and
forced  a  Confederate  withdrawal.  As  the  fighting  at
Shiloh ended on April 7, Grant surveyed a large field
“so covered with dead that it would have been possible
to walk over the clearing in any direction, stepping on
dead bodies, without a foot touching the ground.” The
cost  in  lives  was  horrific,  but  Lincoln  was  resolute:
“What I want . . . is generals who will fight battles and
win victories.”

Three weeks later, Union naval forces commanded
by  David  G.  Farragut  struck  the  Confederacy  from
the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  They  captured  New  Orleans,  the
South’s financial center and largest city. The Union army
also  took  control  of  fifteen  hundred  plantations  and
50,000 slaves in the surrounding region, striking a strong
blow  against  slavery.  Workers  on  some  plantations
looted their owners’ mansions; others refused to labor
unless they were paid wages. “[Slavery there] is forever
destroyed  and  worthless,”  declared  one  northern
reporter. Union victories had significantly undermined
Confederate strength in the Mississippi River Valley.

Toward Total War
The  military  carnage  in  1862  revealed  that  the  war
would  be  long  and  costly.  Grant  later  remarked  that,
after Shiloh, he “gave up all idea of saving the Union

except by complete conquest.” Lincoln agreed. During
the summer of 1862, he abandoned hope for a compro-
mise peace that would restore the Union. Instead, he
committed the nation to a total war that would mobi-
lize all of society’s resources — economic, political, and
cultural — in support of the North’s military effort and
end  slavery  in  the  South.  Aided  by  the  Republican
Party  and  a  talented  cabinet,  Lincoln  gradually  orga-
nized an effective central government able to wage all-
out  war;  and  urged  on  by  antislavery  politicians  and
activists,  he  moved  toward  a  controversial  proclama-
tion of emancipation. Jefferson Davis had less success
at  harnessing  southern  resources,  because  the  eleven
states of the Confederacy remained suspicious of cen-
tralized  rule  and  southern  yeomen  grew  increasingly
skeptical of the war effort.

Mobilizing Armies and Civilians
Initially, patriotic fervor filled both armies with eager
young volunteers. All he heard was “War! War! War!”
one Union recruit recalled. Even those of sober minds
joined up. “I don’t think a young man ever went over all
the considerations more carefully than I did,” reflected
William  Saxton  of  Cincinnatus,  New  York.  “It  might
mean  sickness,  wounds,  loss  of  limb,  and  even  life
itself. . . . But my country was in danger.” The southern
call for volunteers was even more successful, thanks to
its strong military tradition and a culture that stressed
duty and honor. “Would you, My Darling, . . . be will-
ing  to  leave  your  Children  under  such  a  [despotic
Union]  government?”  James  B.  Griffin  of  Edgefield,
South  Carolina,  asked  his  wife.  “No — I  know  you
would  sacrifice  every  comfort  on  earth,  rather  than
submit to it.” However, enlistments declined as poten-
tial recruits learned the realities of mass warfare: epi-
demic  diseases  in  the  camps  and  wholesale  death  on
the battlefields. Both governments soon faced the need
for conscription.

The Military Draft  The Confederacy acted first. In
April  1862,  following  the  bloodshed  at  Shiloh,  the
Confederate Congress imposed the first legally binding
draft  (conscription)  in  American  history.  New  laws
required existing soldiers to serve for the duration of
the war and mandated three years of military service
from all men between the ages of eighteen and thirty-
five.  In  September  1862,  after  the  heavy  casualties  at
Antietam,  the  age  limit  jumped  to  forty-five.  The
South’s  draft  had  two  loopholes,  both  controversial.
First, it exempted one white man — the planter, a son,
or an overseer — for each twenty slaves, allowing some

