454

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

Kansas Volunteers, 1862

When they posed for this
tintype photograph in 1862,
these men from Company E,
8th Kansas Volunteer Infantry,
had marched hundreds of miles
through Kentucky and Tennessee
in a largely fruitless pursuit of a
Confederate army and wore the
look of battle-hardened troops.
Some of these volunteers appear
to be in their thirties or forties,
and perhaps were abolitionist
veterans of the civil strife in
Bloody Kansas during the
1850s. Kansas State Historical
Society.

whites  on  large  plantations  to  avoid  military  service.
This provision, a Mississippi legislator warned Jefferson
Davis, “has aroused a spirit of rebellion in some places.”
Second, draftees could hire substitutes. By the time the
Confederate Congress closed this loophole in 1864, the
price of a substitute had soared to $300 in gold, three
times the annual wage of a skilled worker. Laborers and
yeomen farmers angrily complained that it was “a rich
man’s war and a poor man’s fight.”

Consequently, some southerners refused to serve.
Because the Confederate constitution vested sovereignty
in the individual states, the government in Richmond
could not compel military service. Independent-minded
governors  such  as  Joseph  Brown  of  Georgia  and
Zebulon  Vance  of  North  Carolina  simply  ignored
President Davis’s first draft call in
early 1862. Elsewhere, state judges
issued  writs  of  habeas  corpus —
legal instruments used to protect
people from arbitrary arrest — and
ordered the Confederate army to
release  reluctant  draftees.  How-
ever,  the  Confederate  Congress

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
How did the Union and
Confederacy mobilize their
populations for war, and
how effective were these
methods?

overrode the judges’ authority to free conscripted men,
so the government was able to keep substantial armies
in the field well into 1864.

The  Union  government  acted  more  ruthlessly
toward  draft  resisters  and  Confederate  sympathizers.
In Missouri and other border states, Union command-
ers levied special taxes on southern supporters. Lincoln
went further, suspending habeas corpus and, over the
course  of  the  war,  temporarily  imprisoning  about
15,000  southern  sympathizers  without  trial.  He  also
gave military courts jurisdiction over civilians who dis-
couraged enlistments or resisted the draft, preventing
acquittals by sympathetic local juries. However, most
Union governments used incentives to lure recruits. To
meet  the  local  quotas  set  by  the  Militia  Act  of  1862,
towns,  counties,  and  states  used  cash  bounties  of  as
much  as  $600  (about  $11,000  today)  and  signed  up
nearly 1 million men. The Union also allowed men to
avoid military service by providing a substitute or pay-
ing a $300 fee.

When the Enrollment Act of 1863 finally initiated
conscription,  recent  German  and  Irish  immigrants
often refused to serve. It  was not their war, they said.

