CHAPTER 14

  Two Societies at War, 1861–1865

455

Northern Democrats used the furor over conscription
to  bolster  support  for  their  party,  which  increasingly
criticized  Lincoln’s  policies.  They  accused  Lincoln  of
drafting  poor  whites  to  liberate  enslaved  blacks,  who
would then flood the cities and take their jobs. Slavery
was  nearly  “dead,  [but]  the  negro  is  not,  there  is  the
misfortune,”  declared  a  Democratic  newspaper  in
Cincinnati.  In  July  1863,  the  immigrants’  hostility  to
conscription  and  blacks  sparked  riots  in  New  York
City.  For  five  days,  Irish  and  German  workers  ran
rampant,  burning  draft  offices,  sacking  the  homes  of
influential Republicans, and attacking the police. The
rioters lynched and mutilated a dozen African Amer-
icans,  drove  hundreds  of  black  families  from  their
homes, and burned down the Colored Orphan Asylum.
To suppress the mobs, Lincoln rushed in Union troops
who  had  just  fought  at  Gettysburg;  they  killed  more
than a hundred rioters.

The  Union  government  won  much  stronger  sup-
port  from  native-born  middle-class citizens.  In  1861,
prominent  New  Yorkers  established  the  U.S.  Sanitary
Commission to provide the troops with clothing, food,
and medical services. Seven thousand local auxiliaries
assisted  the  commission’s  work.  “I  almost  weep,”
reported a local agent, “when these plain rural people
come to send their simple offerings to absent sons and
brothers.”  The  commission  also  recruited  battlefield
nurses  and  doctors  for  the  Union  Army  Medical
Bureau. Despite these efforts, dysentery, typhoid, and
malaria spread through the camps, as did mumps and
measles, viruses that were often deadly to rural recruits.
Diseases  and  infections  killed  about  250,000  Union
soldiers, nearly twice the 135,000 who died in combat.
Still, thanks to the Sanitary Commission, Union troops
had  a  far  lower  mortality  rate  than  soldiers  fighting
in  nineteenth-century  European  wars.  Confederate

The Business of Recruiting an Army

Even before the antidraft riots in New York City in July 1863, Union governments used monetary bonuses
to induce men to join the army, and the payments increased as the war continued. George Law’s painting
shows a New York recruiting post in 1864. To meet the state’s quota of 30,000 men, the county and state
governments offered volunteers bounties of $300 and $75 — on top of a U.S. government bounty of $302.
The total — some $677 — was serious money at a time when the average worker earned $1.70 for a
ten-hour day. Anne S. K. Brown Military Collection, Brown University Library.

