456

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

produced a new “cult of mourning” among the middle
and upper classes.

Women
in  Wartime  As  tens  of  thousands  of
wounded husbands and sons limped home, their wives
and  sisters  helped  them  rebuild  their  lives.  Another
200,000 women worked as volunteers in the Sanitary
Commission  and  the  Freedman’s  Aid  Society,  which
collected supplies for liberated slaves.

The  war  also  drew  more  women  into  the  wage-
earning  workforce  as  nurses,  clerks,  and  factory
operatives. Dorothea Dix (Chapter 11) served as super-
intendent  of  female  nurses  and,  by  successfully  com-
bating the prejudice against women providing medical
treatment to men, opened a new occupation to women.
Thousands of educated Union women became govern-
ment clerks, while southern women staffed the efficient
Confederate postal service. In both societies, millions
of women took over farm tasks; filled jobs in schools
and  offices;  and  worked  in  textile,  shoe,  and  food-
processing factories. A few even became spies, scouts,
and (disguising themselves as men) soldiers. As Union
nurse Clara Barton, who later founded the American
Red Cross, recalled, “At t he war’s end, woman was at
least  fifty  years  in  advance  of  the  normal  position
which continued peace would have assigned her.”

Mobilizing Resources
Wars are usually won by the side that possesses greater
resources.  In  that  regard,  the  Union  had  a  distinct
advantage. With nearly two-thirds of the nation’s pop-
ulation, two-thirds of the railroad mileage, and almost
90 percent of the industrial output, the North’s econ-
omy was far superior to that of the South (Figure 14.2).
Furthermore, many of its arms factories were equipped
for mass production.

Still, the Confederate position was far from weak.
Virginia, North Carolina, and Tennessee had substan-
tial  industrial  capacity.  Richmond,  with  its  Tredegar
Iron  Works,  was  an  important  manufacturing  center,
and  in  1861  it  acquired  the  gun-making  machinery
from the U.S. armory at Harpers Ferry. The production
at the Richmond armory, the purchase of Enfield rifles
from Britain, and the capture of 100,000 Union guns
enabled the Confederacy to provide every infantryman
with a modern rifle-musket by 1863.

Moreover, with 9 million people, the Confederacy
could  mobilize  enormous  armies.  Enslaved  blacks,
one-third  of  the  population,  became  part  of  the  war
effort  by  producing  food  for  the  army  and  raw  cot-
ton  for  export.  Confederate  leaders  counted  on  King

Hospital Nursing

Working as nurses in battlefront hospitals, thousands of
Union and Confederate women gained ﬁrsthand experience
of the horrors of war. A sense of calm prevails in this
behind-the-lines Union hospital in Nashville, Tennessee, as
nurse Anne Belle tends to the needs of soldiers recovering
from their wounds. Most Civil War nurses were volunteers
with little medical training; they spent time cooking and
cleaning for their patients as well as tending their injuries.
U.S. Army Military History Institute.

troops were less fortunate, despite the efforts of thou-
sands  of  women  who  volunteered  as  nurses,  because
the Confederate army’s health system was poorly orga-
nized. Scurvy was a special problem for southern sol-
diers;  lacking  vitamin  C  in  their  diets,  they  suffered
muscle ailments and had low resistance to camp dis-
eases (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 458).

So much death created new industries and cultural
rituals. Embalmers devised a zinc chloride fluid to pre-
serve  soldiers’  bodies,  allowing  them  to  be  shipped
home  for  burial,  an  innovation  that  began  modern
funeral practices. Military cemeteries with hundreds of
crosses  in  neat  rows  replaced  the  landscaped  “rural
cemeteries”  in  vogue  in  American  cities  before  the
Civil War. As thousands of mothers, wives, and sisters
mourned  the  deaths  of  fallen  soldiers,  they  faced
changed lives. Confronting utter deprivation, working-
class  women  grieved  for  the  loss  of  a  breadwinner.
Middle-class  wives  often  had  financial  resources  but,
having embraced the affectionate tenets of domesticity,
mourned  the  death  of  a  loved  one  by  wearing  black
crape “mourning” dresses and other personal accesso-
ries of death. The destructive war, in concert with the
emerging  consumer  culture  and  ethic  of  domesticity,

