CHAPTER 14

  Two Societies at War, 1861–1865

457

FIGURE 14.2
Economies, North and South, 1860

The military advantages of the North were even
greater than this chart suggests. The population
ﬁgures for the South include slaves, whom the
Confederacy feared to arm. Also, the South’s
commodity output was primarily in farm goods
rather than manufactures. Finally, southern factories
were much smaller on average than those in the
North.

Population

Commodity output

Farm acreage

Factories

Railroad mileage

North

61%

70%

67%

85%

66%

South

39%

30%

33%

15%

34%

Cotton — the  leading  American  export  and  a  cru-
cial  staple  of  the  nineteenth-century  economy — to
purchase  clothes,  boots,  blankets,  and  weapons  from
abroad.  Leaders  also  saw  cotton  as  a  diplomatic
weapon that would persuade Britain and France, which
had large textile industries, to assist the Confederacy.

However, British manufacturers had stockpiled cotton
and  developed  new  sources  in  Egypt  and  India.  Still,
the  South  received  some  foreign  support.  Although
Britain never recognized the Confederacy as an inde-
pendent  nation,  it  treated  the  rebel  government  as  a
belligerent power — with the right under international

Richmond: Capital City and Industrial Center

The Confederacy chose Richmond as its capital because of the historic importance of Virginia as the home
of Washington, Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe. However, Richmond was also a major industrial center.
Exploiting the city’s location at the falls of the James River, the city’s entrepreneurs had developed a wide
range of industries: ﬂour mills, tobacco factories, railroad and port facilities, and, most important, a sub-
stantial iron industry. In 1861, the Tredegar Iron Works employed nearly a thousand workers and, as the
only facility in the South that could manufacture large machinery and heavy weapons, made a major
contribution to the Confederate war effort. The Library of Virginia.

