T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Military Deaths — and

Lives Saved — During

the Civil War

The Civil War, like all wars before and since, encouraged innovation in both the
destruction and the saving of human life. More than 620,000 soldiers — 360,000
on  the  Union  side  and  260,000  Confederates — died  during  the  war,  about  20
percent of those who served. However, thanks to advances in camp hygiene and
battleﬁeld treatment, the Union death rate was about 54–58 per 1,000 soldiers
per year, less than half the level for British and French troops during the Crimean
War of 1854–1855.

1.  Report by surgeon Charles S. Tipler, medical direc-
tor of the Army of the Potomac, January 4, 1862.
Most Civil War deaths came from disease. The
major killers were bacterial intestinal diseases —
typhoid fever, diarrhea, and dysentery — which
spread because of unsanitary conditions in the
camps.

The aggregate strength of the forces from which I have
received reports is 142,577. Of these, 47,836 have been
under treatment in the field and general hospitals, 35,915
of whom have been returned to duty, and 281 have died;
9,281 remained under treatment at the end of the
month; . . .

The diseases from which our men have suffered
most have been continued remittent and typhoid fevers,
measles, diarrhea, dysentery, and the various forms of
catarrh [heavy discharge of mucus from the nose]. Of all
the scourges incident to armies in the field I suppose that
chronic diarrheas and dysenteries have always been the
most prevalent and the most fatal. I am happy to say that
in this army they are almost unknown. We have but 280
cases of chronic diarrhea and 69 of chronic dysentery
reported in the month of November.

2.  Minie ball wounds: femur shot by Springfield 1862

rifle and Private George W. Lemon, 1867.

Ninety percent of battle casualties were the victims of a
new technology: musket-rifles that fired lethal soft-lead
bullets called minie balls (after their inventor, Claude-
Étienne Minié). The rifle-musket revolutionized military
strategy by enormously strengthening defensive forces.
Infantrymen could now kill reliably at 300 yards — triple
the previous range of muskets. Initially, the new technol-
ogy baffled commanders, who continued to use the tactics
perfected during the heyday of the musket and bayonet
charge, sending waves of infantrymen against enemy
positions.

A minie ball strike to the abdomen, chest, or head was

usually fatal, but injuries to the limbs gave some hope of
survival, given advances in battlefield surgery. When

458

Private George W. Lemon suffered a minie ball wound
to his femur similar to the one shown here (below), sur-
geons amputated his leg below the hip and, after the
war, fitted him with a prosthetic leg.

Source: National Museum of Health & Medicine, Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology.

Source: Courtesy National Library of Medicine.

