3.  Kate Cumming, April 23, 1862, journal entry on
treating a Confederate victim after the Battle of
Shiloh. Union surgeons performed 29,980 battle-
ﬁeld amputations during the Civil War. Confederate
records are less complete, but surgeons apparently
undertook about 28,000 amputations. They quickly
removed limbs too shattered to mend, which
increased the chances of survival. According to
one witness, “surgeons and their assistants,
stripped to the waist and bespattered with
blood, stood around, some holding the poor
fellows while others, armed with long, bloody
knives and saws, cut and sawed away with fright-
ful rapidity, throwing the mangled limbs on a pile
nearby as soon as removed.” This journal entry
from a young Confederate nurse in Corinth, Mis-
sissippi, describes the plight of one such victim
after the Battle of Shiloh.

A young man whom I have been attending is going to
have his arm cut off. Poor fellow! I am doing all I can to
cheer him. He says that he knows that he will die, as all
who have had limbs amputated in this hospital have
died. . . . He lived only a few hours after his amputation.

4.  William Williams Keen, MD, “Surgical Reminis-
cences of the Civil War,” 1905. Although 73
percent of the Union amputees survived the
war, infected wounds — deadly gangrene —
took the lives of most soldiers who suffered
certain gunshot injuries in this pre-antibiotic,
pre-antiseptic era. Keen, who later became the
ﬁrst brain surgeon in the United States, served
as a surgeon in the Union army.

Not more than one incontestable example of recovery
from a gunshot wound of the stomach and not a single
incontestable case of wound of the small intestines are
recorded during the entire war among the almost 250,000
wounded. . . .

Of 852 amputations of the shoulder-joint, 236 died,
a mortality of 28.5 per cent. Of 66 cases of amputation
of the hip-joint, 55, or 83.3 per cent died. Of 155 cases of
trephining [cutting a hole in the skull to relieve pressure],
60 recovered and 95 died, a mortality of over 61 per cent.
Of 374 ligations of the femoral artery, 93 recovered and
281 died, a mortality of over 75 per cent.

These figures afford a striking evidence of the dreadful
mortality of military surgery in the days before antisepsis
and first-aid packages. Happily such death-rates can never
again be seen, at least in civilized warfare.

5.  John Tooker, MD, “Aspects of Medicine, Nurs-

ing, and the Civil War,” 2007. The Union doctor
Jonathan Letterman pioneered a new method
of battleﬁeld triage that was adopted by the
entire army in 1864.

Letterman had devised an efficient and, for the times,
modern system of mass casualty management, begin-
ning with first aid adjacent to the battlefield, removal of
the wounded by an organized ambulance system to field
hospitals for urgent and stabilizing treatment, such as
wound closure and amputation, and then referral to gen-
eral hospitals for longer term definitive management.
This three-stage approach to casualty management,
strengthened by effective and efficient transport, earned
Letterman the title of “The Father of Battlefield Medicine.”

Sources: (1) The War of the Rebellion: A Compilation of the Official Records of the
Union and Confederate Armies (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office,
1889), Series 1, Vol. 5 (Part V), 111–112; (3) Kate Cumming, A Journal of Hospital
Life in the Confederate Army of Tennessee (Louisville, KY: John P. Morton & Com-
pany, 1866), 19; (4) William Williams Keen, “Surgical Reminiscences of the Civil
War,” in Addresses and Other Papers (Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders, 1905), 433–434;
(5) John Tooker, “Antietam: Aspects of Medicine, Nursing, and the Civil War,”
National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Based on Tipler’s report (source 1), would you say the

Union army was healthy or unhealthy? Ready for battle
or not?

2.  Consider sources 2–4. How do you think the reentry of
tens of thousands of maimed veterans into civil society
affected American culture?

3.  What do sources 3–5 suggest about the successes and

limitations of battleﬁeld medicine during the Civil War?

4.  Consider the Civil War in the context of the Industrial

Revolution. What was the impact of factory production
and technological advances on the number of weapons
and their killing power? And how might the organiza-
tional innovations of the Industrial Revolution pertain
to the conﬂict? In this regard, what do you make of the
new method of battleﬁeld triage pioneered by Union
doctor Jonathan Letterman (source 5)?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

As a “total war” the Civil War involved the citizenry as well
as the military, marshaling all of the two societies’ resources
and ingenuity. Using your understanding of these docu-
ments and the textbook, write an essay that discusses the
relation of the war to technology, medicine, public ﬁnance,
and the lives of women on the battle lines and the home
front.

459

