460

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

law  to  borrow  money  and  purchase  weapons.  The
odds, then, did not necessarily favor the Union, despite
its superior resources.

Republican Economic and Fiscal Policies  To mobil-
ize  northern  resources,  the  Republican-dominated
Congress  enacted  a  neomercantilist  program  of
government-assisted  economic  development  that  far
surpassed Henry Clay’s American System (Chapter 10).
The Republicans imposed high tariffs (averaging nearly
40 percent) on various foreign goods, thereby encour-
aging  domestic  industries.  To  boost  agricultural  out-
put, they offered “free land” to farmers. The Home stead
Act of 1862 gave settlers the title to 160 acres of public
land  after  five  years  of  residence.  To  create  an  inte-
grated  national  banking  system  (far  more  powerful
than the First and Second Banks of the United States),
Secretary of the Treasury Salmon P. Chase forced thou-
sands  of  local  banks  to  accept  federal  charters  and
regulations.

Finally,  the  Republican  Congress  implemented
Clay’s program for a nationally financed transportation
system.  Expansion  to  the  Pacific,  the  California  gold
rush, and subsequent discoveries of gold, silver, copper,
and other metals in Nevada, Montana, and other west-
ern  lands  had  revived  demands
for such a network. Therefore, in
1862,  Congress  chartered  the
Union Pacific and Central Pacific
companies  to  build  a  transconti-
nental  railroad  line  and  granted
them  lavish  subsidies.  This  eco-
nomic  program  won  the  alle-
giance  of  farmers,  workers,  and
entrepreneurs and bolstered the Union’s ability to fight
a long war.

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did the economic
policies of the Republican-
controlled Congress
redeﬁne the character of
the federal government?

New  industries  sprang  up  to  provide  the  Union
army — and  its  1.5  million  men — with  guns,  clothes,
and food. Over the course of the war, soldiers consumed
more  than  half  a  billion  pounds  of  pork  and  other
packed meats. To meet this demand, Chicago railroads
built new lines to carry thousands of hogs and cattle to
the city’s stockyards and slaughterhouses. By 1862, Chi-
cago had passed Cincinnati as the meatpacking capital
of the nation, bringing prosperity to thousands of mid-
western farmers and great wealth to Philip D. Armour
and other meatpacking entrepreneurs.

Bankers and financiers likewise found themselves
pulled into the war effort. The annual spending of the
Union government shot up from $63 million in 1860 to
more  than  $865  million  in  1864.  To  raise  that  enor-
mous sum, the Republicans created a modern system

of  public  finance  that  secured  funds  in  three  ways.
First,  the  government  increased  tariffs;  placed  high
duties  on  alcohol  and  tobacco;  and  imposed  direct
taxes on business corporations, large inheritances, and
the incomes of wealthy citizens. These levies paid about
20 percent of the cost. Second, interest-paying bonds
issued  by  the  U.S.  Treasury  financed  another  65  per-
cent.  The  National  Banking  Acts  of  1863  and  1864
forced most banks to buy those bonds; and Philadelphia
banker  and  Treasury  Department  agent  Jay  Cooke
used newspaper ads and 2,500 subagents to persuade a
million northern families to buy them.

The Union paid the remaining 15 percent by print-
ing paper money. The Legal Tender Act of 1862 autho-
rized $150 million in paper currency — soon known as
greenbacks — and required the public to accept them
as  legal  tender.  Like  the  Continental  currency  of  the
Revolutionary era, greenbacks could not be exchanged
for  specie;  however,  the  Treasury  issued  a  limited
amount of paper money, so it lost only a small part of
its face value.

If a modern fiscal system was one result of the war,
immense concentrations of capital in many industries —
meatpacking, steel, coal, railroads, textiles, shoes — was
another. The task of supplying the huge war machine, an
observer noted, gave a few men “the command of mil-
lions  of  money.”  Such  massed  financial  power  threat-
ened not only the prewar society of small producers but
also the future of democratic self-government (America
Compared, p. 461). Americans “are never again to see
the republic in which we were born,” lamented aboli-
tionist and social reformer Wendell Phillips.

The South Resorts to Coercion and Inflation  The
economic  demands  on  the  South  were  equally  great,
but, true to its states’ rights philosophy, the Confederacy
initially  left  most  matters  to  the  state  governments.
However,  as  the  realities  of  total  war  became  clear,
Jefferson  Davis’s  administration  took  extraordinary
measures.  It  built  and  operated  shipyards,  armories,
foundries, and textile mills; commandeered food and
scarce  raw  materials  such  as  coal,  iron,  copper,  and
lead;  requisitioned  slaves  to  work  on  fortifications;
and directly controlled foreign trade.

The Confederate Congress and ordinary southern
citizens  opposed  many  of  Davis’s  initiatives,  particu-
larly  those  involving  taxes.  The  Congress  refused  to
tax cotton exports and slaves, the most valuable prop-
erty  held  by  wealthy  planters,  and  the  urban  middle
classes and yeomen farm families refused to pay more
than  their  fair  share.  Consequently,  the  Confederacy
covered less than 10 percent of its expenditures through

