A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

War Debt: Britain and the United States, 1830–1900

Wars cost money, sometimes a lot of money, and nations
often  pay  for  them  by  issuing  bonds  and  expanding  the
national debt. The British national debt grew enormously
between 1750 and 1815 as it fought a great series of wars,
all  of  which  involved  either  its  American  colonies  or  the
United States: the Great War for Empire (1754–1763), the
War of American Independence (1776–1783), and the Wars
of the French Revolution and Napoleon (1793–1815). Con-
sequently,  Britain’s  national  debt  peaked  in  1815  at  260
percent of its gross domestic product (GDP). Even in 1830,
after  years  of  high  taxation  and  economic  growth,  the
debt amounted to 180 percent of British GDP.

By comparison, the United States in 1830 was virtually
debt-free,  as  the  policies  of  Jeffersonian  Republicans
reduced  its  debt  from  about  27  percent  of  GDP  in  1790

United States
United Kingdom

200

150

100

50

)

%

(
o
i
t
a
R
P
D
G
o
t

t
b
e
D

0

0
3
8
1

0
4
8
1

0
5
8
1

0
6
8
1

0
7
8
1

0
8
8
1

0
9
8
1

0
0
9
1

FIGURE 14.3
United States and United Kingdom National Debt as
a Percentage of Gross Domestic Product, 1830–1900

to  less  than  5  percent.  Ample  tariff  revenues  and  the
frugal  policies  of  Presidents  Andrew  Jackson  and  Martin
Van  Buren  then  cut  the  debt  nearly  to  zero  by  the  early
1840s.  Even  the  war  with  Mexico  barely  raised  the  level
of  the  debt,  thanks  to  the  return  of  prosperity  and  the
growth of GDP between 1844 and 1857.

Then  came  the  Civil  War,  which  boosted  the  Union
debt from $62 million in 1860 to $2.2 billion at the end of
1865,  a  1,500  percent  increase.  (The  Fourteenth  Amend-
ment, ratiﬁed in 1868, declared “illegal and void” all debts
incurred  by  the  Confederacy.)  In  relation  to  GDP,  the
U.S.  national  debt  shot  up  to  27  percent,  the  same  level
as  1790,  and  then — thanks  again  to  tariff  revenue —
decreased gradually to about 10 percent of GDP by 1900.
By then, the British national debt had fallen to about 40
percent  of  its  GDP,  as  the  British — the  world’s  strongest
power — mostly avoided new wars and built a prosperous
commercial and industrial economy. The cost of war, civil
or international, may well be a high national debt.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  In 1864, President Lincoln lamented: “This war of ours,
in its magnitude and in its duration, is one of the most
terrible. It has produced a national debt and taxation
unprecedented, at least in this country.” Given the relative
size of the Union debt in relation to that of Britain, were
Lincoln’s worries exaggerated?

2.  In 2012, the national debt of the United States — now the
world’s premier economic and military power — was nearly
100 percent of GDP and, since 1940, has averaged about
60 percent of GDP. Given those facts, and the evidence
in this chart, is it fair to conclude that one of the costs of
global power is a high national debt?

taxation. The government paid another 30 percent by
borrowing,  but  wealthy  planters  and  foreign  bankers
grew  increasingly  fearful  that  the  South  would  never
redeem its bonds.

Consequently,  the  Confederacy  paid  60  percent
of  its  war  costs  by  printing  paper  money.  The  flood

of  currency  created  a  spectacular  inflation:  by  1865,
prices had risen to ninety-two times their 1861 level.
As  food  prices  soared,  riots  erupted  in  more  than
a  dozen  southern  cities  and  towns.  In  Richmond,
several  hundred  women  broke  into  bakeries,  crying,
“Our  children  are  starving  while  the  rich  roll  in

461

