462

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

A Southern Refugee Family

As Union and Confederate armies swept back and forth across northern Virginia and other war zones, the
civilian population feared for its property and personal security. Here, two southern women — their husbands
presumably away at war — have hitched up their mules and piled their goods and children on a farm wagon
in order to ﬂee the ﬁghting. Lucky refugees had relatives in safe areas; others had to rely on the goodwill of
strangers. National Archives.

wealth.” In Randolph County, Alabama, women con-
fiscated grain from a government warehouse “to pre-
vent  starvation  of  themselves  and  their  families.”  As
inflation  spiraled  upward,  southerners  refused  to
accept  paper  money,  whatever  the  consequences.
When South Carolina storekeeper Jim Harris refused
the  depreciated  currency  presented  by  Confederate
soldiers,  they  raided  his  storehouse  and,  he  claimed,
“robbed  it  of  about  five  thousand  dollars  worth  of
goods.”  Army  supply  officers  likewise  seized  goods
from  merchants  and  offered  payment  in  worthless
IOUs. Facing a public that feared strong government
and high taxation, the Confederacy could sustain the
war effort only by seizing its citizens’ property — and
by  championing  white  supremacy:  President  Davis
warned  that  a  Union  victory  would  destroy  slavery
“and reduce the whites to the degraded position of the
African race.”

The Turning Point: 1863
By  1863,  the  Lincoln  administration  had  created  an
efficient war machine and a set of strategic priorities.
Henry  Adams,  the  grandson  of  John  Quincy  Adams
and a future novelist and historian, noted the change
from  his  diplomatic  post  in  London:  “Little  by  little,
one began to feel that, behind the chaos in Washington
power was taking shape; that it was massed and guided
as it had not been before.” Slowly but surely, the tide of
the struggle turned against the Confederacy.

Emancipation
When  the  war  began,  antislavery  Republicans  de-
manded that abolition be a goal of the war. The fight-
ing should continue, said a Massachusetts abolitionist,

