CHAPTER 14

  Two Societies at War, 1861–1865

463

“until  the  Slave  power  is  completely  subjugated,  and
emancipation made certain.” Because slave-grown crops
sustained  the  Confederacy,  activists  justified  black
emancipation  on  military  grounds.  As  Frederick
Douglass  put  it,  “Arrest  that  hoe  in  the  hands  of  the
Negro, and you smite the rebellion in the very seat of
its life.”

“Contrabands”  As abolitionists pressed their case,
African  Americans  exploited  wartime  chaos  to  seize
freedom for themselves. When three slaves reached the
camp of Union general Benjamin Butler in Virginia in
May 1861, he labeled them “contraband of war” (enemy
property that can be legitimately seized, according to
international law) and refused to return them. Butler’s
term stuck, and soon thousands of “contrabands” were
camping  with  Union  armies.  Near  Fredericksburg,
Virginia, an average of 200 blacks appeared every day,
“with their packs on their backs and handkerchiefs tied
over  their  heads — men,  women,  little  children,  and
babies.” This influx created a humanitarian crisis; abo-
litionist Harriet Jacobs reported that hundreds of refu-
gees  were  “[p]acked  together  in  the  most  miserable
quarters,” where many died from smallpox and dysen-
tery.  To  provide  legal  status  to  the  refugees — some
400,000  by  the  war’s  end — in  August  1861  Congress

passed  the  Confiscation  Act,  which  authorized  the
seizure of all property, including slave property, used to
support the rebellion.

With the Confiscation Act, Radical Republicans —
the  members  of  the  party  who  had  been  bitterly
opposed  to  the  “Slave  Power”  since  the  mid-1850s —
began  to  use  wartime  legislation  to  destroy  slavery.
Their  leaders  were  treasury  secretary  Salmon  Chase,
Senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts, and Repre-
sentative  Thaddeus  Stevens  of  Pennsylvania.  A  long-
time  member  of  Congress,  Stevens  was  a  masterful
politician,  skilled  at  fashioning  legislation  that  could
win majority support. In April 1862, Stevens and the
Radicals  persuaded  Congress  to  end  slavery  in  the
District  of  Columbia  by  providing  compensation  for
owners; in June, Congress outlawed slavery in the fed-
eral territories (finally enacting the Wilmot Proviso of
1846); and in July, it passed a second Confiscation Act,
which declared “forever free” the thousands of refugee
slaves  and  all  slaves  captured  by  the  Union  army.
Emancipation had become an instrument of war.

The Emancipation Proclamation
Initially, Lincoln
rejected  emancipation  as  a  war  aim,  but  faced  with
thousands of refugees and Radical Republican pressure,
he  moved  cautiously  toward  that  goal.  The  president

Eastman Johnson, A Ride for
Freedom — The Fugitive Slaves,
c. 1862

At the second battle of Manassas
in September 1862, American
genre painter Eastman Johnson
(1824–1906) witnessed this
“veri table incident” of an African
American family ﬂeeing slavery —
and then painted it. A powerful,
split-second image of the riders’
silhouettes, Johnson’s painting
captures the father looking forward
toward freedom, while the mother
cradles a young child and looks back
apprehensively for possible pursuers.
By “free ing themselves,” this family
and thousands of blacks set the stage
for Lincoln’s Emancipation Procla-
mation. Brooklyn Museum of Art, New
York, USA/The Bridgeman Art Library.

