464

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

drafted a general proclamation of emancipation in July
1862,  and  he  publicly  linked  black  freedom  with  the
preservation of the Union in August. “If I could save
the  Union  without  freeing  any  slave,  I  would  do  it,”
Lincoln told Horace Greeley of the New York Tribune,
“and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves, I would
do it.”

Now  he  waited  for  a  Union  victory.  Considering
the  Battle  of  Antietam  “an  indication  of  the  Divine
Will,”  Lincoln  issued  a  preliminary  proclamation  of
emancipation on September 22, 1862, basing its legal
authority  on  his  duty  as  commander  in chief  to  sup-
press the rebellion. The proclamation legally abolished
slavery in all states that remained out of the Union on
January 1, 1863. The rebel states could preserve slavery
by renouncing secession. None chose to do so.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Some historians argue that
slaves “freed themselves”
by ﬂeeing to Union armies,
thereby forcing Lincoln
to issue the Emancipation
Proclamation. How persua-
sive is that argument?

The  proclamation  was  politically  astute.  Lincoln
conciliated slave owners in the Union-controlled bor-
der states, such as Maryland and
Missouri, by leaving slavery intact
in  those  states.  It  also  permitted
slavery to continue in areas occu-
pied  by  Union  armies:  western
and  central  Tennessee,  western
Virginia, and southern Louisiana.
In  Indian  Territory,  also  under
Union control, most mixed-blood
Cherokee slave owners remained
committed  to  the  Confederacy
and to bondage. They did not formally free their 4,000
slaves until July 1866, when a treaty with the U.S. gov-
ernment specified that their ex-slaves “shall have all the
rights of native Cherokee.”

Consequently, the Emancipation Proclamation did
not immediately free a single slave. Yet, as abolitionist
Wendell  Phillips  understood,  Lincoln’s  proclamation
had moved slavery to “the edge of Niagara,” and would
soon sweep it over the brink. Advancing Union troops
became the agents of slavery’s destruction. “I  became
free in 1863, in the summer, when the yankees come by
and said I could go work for myself,” recalled Jackson
Daniel of Maysville, Alabama. As Lincoln now saw it,
“the old South is to be destroyed and replaced by new
propositions and ideas” — a system of free labor.

Hailed by reformers in Europe, emancipation was
in  America.  In  the
extraordinarily  controversial
Confederacy, Jefferson Davis labeled it the “most exe-
crable measure recorded in the history of guilty man”;
in the North, white voters unleashed a racist backlash.
During the elections of 1862, the Democrats denounced
emancipation  as  unconstitutional,  warned  of  slave
uprisings, and predicted that freed blacks would take

white  jobs.  Every  freed  slave,  suggested  a  nativist-
minded  New  Yorker,  should  “shoulder  an  Irishman
and  leave  the  Continent.”  Such  sentiments  propelled
Democrat Horatio Seymour into the governor’s office
in  New  York;  if  abolition  was  a  war  goal,  Seymour
argued,  the  South  should  not  be  conquered.  In  the
November  election,  Democrats  swept  to  victory  in
Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Illinois and gained thirty-four
seats  in  Congress.  However,  Republicans  still  held  a
twenty-five-seat majority in the House and gained five
seats in the Senate. Lincoln refused to retreat. Calling
emancipation  an  “act  of  justice,”  he  signed  the  final
proclamation  on  New  Year’s  Day  1863.  “If  my  name
ever goes into history,” he said, “it was for this act.”

To see a longer excerpt of the Jefferson Davis
document, along with other primary sources from
this period, see Sources for America’s History.

Vicksburg and Gettysburg
The  Emancipation  Proclamation’s  fate  would  depend
on  Republican  political  success  and  Union  military
victories,  neither  of  which  looked  likely.  Democrats
had made significant gains in 1862, and popular sup-
port was growing for a negotiated peace. Two brilliant
victories in Virginia by General Robert E. Lee, whose
army defeated Union forces at Fredericksburg (Decem-
ber  1862)  and  Chancellorsville  (May  1863),  further
eroded northern support for the war.

The Battle for the Mississippi  At this critical junc-
ture, General Grant mounted a major offensive to split
the Confederacy in two. Grant drove south along the
west  bank  of  the  Mississippi  in  Arkansas  and  then
crossed the river near Vicksburg, Mississippi. There, he
defeated two Confederate armies and laid siege to the
city.  After  repelling  Union  assaults  for  six  weeks,  the
exhausted  and  starving  Vicksburg  garrison  surren-
dered on July 4, 1863. Five days later, Union forces took
Port  Hudson,  Louisiana  (near  Baton  Rouge),  and
seized control of the entire Mississippi River. Grant had
taken 31,000 prisoners; cut off Louisiana, Arkansas, and
Texas from the rest of the Confederacy; and prompted
thousands  of  slaves  to  desert  their  plantations.  Con-
federate  troops  responded  by  targeting  refugees  for
re-enslavement and massacre. “The battlefield was sick-
ening,” a Confederate officer reported from Arkansas,
“no  orders,  threats  or  commands  could  restrain  the
men  from  vengeance  on  the  negroes,  and  they  were
piled in great heaps about the wagons, in the tangled
brushwood, and upon the muddy and trampled road.”

