CHAPTER 14

  Two Societies at War, 1861–1865

465

As Grant had advanced toward Vicksburg in May,
Confederate leaders had argued over the best strategic
response. President Davis and other politicians wanted
to send an army to Tennessee to relieve the Union pres-
sure along the Mississippi River. General Lee, buoyed
by his recent victories, favored a new invasion of the
North. That strategy, Lee suggested, would either draw
Grant’s  forces  to  the  east  or  give  the  Confederacy  a
major  victory  that  would  destroy  the  North’s  will  to
fight.

Lee’s  Advance  and  Defeat  Lee  won  out.  In  June
1863, he maneuvered his army north through Maryland
into  Pennsylvania.  The  Army  of  the  Potomac  moved
along  with  him,  positioning  itself  between  Lee  and
Washington, D.C. On July 1, the two great armies met
by  accident  at  Gettysburg,  Pennsylvania,  in  what
became  a  decisive  confrontation  (Map  14.4).  On  the

first day of battle, Lee drove the Union’s advance guard
to  the  south  of  town.  There,  Union  commander
George  G.  Meade  placed  his  troops  in well-defended
hilltop positions and called up reinforcements. By the
morning  of  July  2,  Meade  had  90,000  troops  to  Lee’s
75,000. Lee knew he was outnumbered but was intent
on victory; he ordered assaults on Meade’s flanks but
failed to turn them.

On  July  3,  Lee  decided  on  a  dangerous  frontal
assault against the center of the Union line. After the
heaviest artillery barrage of the war, Lee sent General
George E. Pickett and his 14,000 men to take Cemetery
Ridge.  When  Pickett’s  men  charged  across  a  mile  of
open terrain, they faced deadly fire from artillery and
massed riflemen; thousands suffered death, wounds, or
capture. As the three-day battle ended, the Confederates
counted  28,000  casualties,  one-third  of  the  Army  of
Northern Virginia, while 23,000 of Meade’s soldiers lay

PENNSYLVANIA

Chambersburg

W

N

S

E

Harrisburg

Carlisle

3
Gettysburg
July 1–3, 1863
(cid:8)

Dover

York

Hagerstown

Potomac R.

Taneytown

Hanover

Westminster

WEST VIRGINIA

Martinsburg

Frederick

MARYLAND

Wrightsville

Susqueh

anna R.

SHENANDOAH  VALLEY

Front Royal

Edwards Ferry

Baltimore

Poolesville

Brookville

Leesburg

Rockville

Washington

Warrenton

VIRGINIA

Culpeper

2
(cid:8)

Brandy Station
June 1863

Chancellorsville
May 1863

(cid:8)

1

Falmouth

(cid:8)

Fredericksburg
Dec. 1862

Potomac R.

MAP 14.4
Lee Invades the North, 1863

C
h
e
s
a
p
e
a
k
e
 B
a
y

0

0

15

30 miles

15

30 kilometers

N.J.

r.
C
h
s
r
a
M

DEL.

Union Movements

Hooker's, later
Meade's, infantry

(cid:8)

Union victory

Confederate Movements

July 1

Gettysburg

July 3

Pickett's
Charge

E
G
D
I
R

Y
R
A
N
I
M
E
S

July 2

E
G
D
I
R

Y
R
E
T
E
M
E
C

July 2

Rock Cr.

LITTLE
ROUND TOP

Battle of Gettysburg

Confederate

Lee's infantry
Confederate victory

Union

(cid:8)

1

Major railroads
Sequence of battles

Earlier position

Earlier position

Later position

Later position

Retreat

Advance

After Lee’s victories at Chancellorsville (1) in May and Brandy Station (2) in June, the Confederate
forces moved northward, constantly shadowed by the Union army. On July 1, the two armies met
accidentally near Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. In the ensuing battle (3), the Union army, commanded
by General George Meade, emerged victorious, primarily because it was much larger than the
Confederate force and held well-fortiﬁed positions along Cemetery Ridge, which gave its units
a major tactical advantage.

