466

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the battles at
Gettysburg and Vicksburg
signiﬁcantly change the
tide of war?

killed  or  wounded.  Shocked  by
the  bloodletting,  Meade  allowed
the  Confederate  units  to  escape.
Lincoln  was  furious  at  Meade’s
caution,  perceiving  that  “the  war
will be prolonged indefinitely.”

Still,  Gettysburg  was  a  great
Union victory and, together with the simultaneous tri-
umph at Vicksburg, marked a major military, political,
and  diplomatic  turning  point.  As  southern  citizens
grew  increasingly  critical  of  their  government,  the
Confederate elections of 1863 went sharply against the
politicians who supported Jefferson Davis. Meanwhile,
northern citizens rallied to the Union, and Republicans
swept state elections in Pennsylvania, Ohio, and New
York. In Europe, the victories boosted the leverage of
American diplomats. Since 1862, the British-built iron-
clad cruiser the Alabama had sunk or captured more
than a hundred Union merchant ships, and the Confed-
eracy was about to accept delivery of two more iron-
clads.  With  a  Union  victory  increasingly  likely,  the
British government decided to impound the warships
and, subsequently, to pay $15.5 million for the depre-
dations of the Alabama. British workers and reformers
had  long  condemned  slavery  and  praised  emancipa-
tion; moreover, because of poor grain harvests, Britain
depended  on  imports  of  wheat  and  flour  from  the
American Midwest. King Cotton diplomacy had failed
and  King  Wheat  stood  triumphant.  “Rest  not  your
hopes  in  foreign  nations,”  President  Jefferson  Davis
advised his people. “This war is ours; we must fight it
ourselves.”

The Union Victorious,
1864–1865
The Union victories of 1863 meant that the South could
not win independence through a decisive military tri-
umph. However, the Confederacy could still hope for a
battlefield  stalemate  and  a  negotiated  peace.  To  keep
the  Union  in  Republican  hands,  Lincoln  faced  the
daunting task of conquering the South.

Soldiers and Strategy
The  promotion  of  aggressive  generals  and  the  enlist-
ment of African American soldiers allowed the Union
to prosecute the war vigorously. As early as 1861, free
African Americans and fugitive slaves had volunteered,
both to end slavery and, as Frederick Douglass put it, to

win “the right to citizenship.” Yet many northern whites
refused to serve with blacks. “I am as much opposed to
slavery  as  any  of  them,”  a  New  York  soldier  told  his
local newspaper, “but I am not willing to be put on a
level with the negro and fight with them.” Union gener-
als also opposed the enlistment of African Americans,
doubting they would make good soldiers. Nonetheless,
free  and  contraband  blacks  formed  volunteer  regi-
ments in New England, South Carolina, Louisiana, and
Kansas.

The  Impact  of  Black  Troops  The  Emancipation
Proclamation  changed  military  policy  and  popular
sentiment. The proclamation invited former slaves to
serve in the Union army, and northern whites, having
suffered  thousands  of  casualties,  now  accepted  that
blacks should share in the fighting and dying. A heroic
and  costly  attack  by  the  54th  Massachusetts  Infantry
on  Fort  Wagner,  South  Carolina,  in  1863  convinced
Union  officers  of  the  value  of  black  soldiers.  By  the
spring  of  1865,  the  Lincoln  administration  had
recruited and armed nearly 200,000 African Americans.
Without  black  soldiers,  said  Lincoln,  “we  would  be
compelled to abandon the war in three weeks.”

Military service did not end racial discrimination.
Black soldiers initially earned less than white soldiers
($10 a month versus $13) and died, mostly from dis-
ease, at  higher rates than white soldiers. Nonetheless,
African  Americans  continued  to  volunteer,  seeking
freedom  and  a  new  social  order.  “Hello,  Massa,”  said
one black soldier to his former master, who had been
taken prisoner. “Bottom rail on top dis time.” The worst
fears  of  the  secessionists  had  come  true:  through  the
disciplined agency of the Union army, African Ameri-
cans had risen in a successful rebellion against slavery,
just  as  six  decades  earlier  enslaved  Haitians  had  won
emancipation  in  the  army  of  Toussaint  L’Ouverture
(Chapter 7).

Capable  Generals  Take  Command  As  African
Americans bolstered the army’s ranks, Lincoln finally
found a ruthless commanding general. In March 1864,
Lincoln placed General Ulysses S. Grant in charge of all
Union armies; from then on, the president determined
overall  strategy  and  Grant  implemented  it.  Lincoln
favored  a  simultaneous  advance  against  the  major
Confederate armies, a strategy Grant had long favored,
in order to achieve a decisive victory before the elec-
tion of 1864.

Grant knew how to fight a war that relied on indus-
trial  technology  and  targeted  an  entire  society.  At
Vicksburg in July 1863, he had besieged the whole city

