CHAPTER 14

  Two Societies at War, 1861–1865

467

Black Soldiers in the Union Army

Determined to end racial slavery, tens of thousands of African Americans volunteered for service in the Union
army in 1864 and 1865, boosting the northern war effort at a critical moment. These soldiers were members
of the 107th Colored Infantry, stationed at Fort Corcoran near Washington, D.C. In January 1865, their
regiment saw action in the daring capture of Fort Fisher, which protected Wilmington, North Carolina, the
last Confederate port open to blockade runners. Library of Congress.

and  forced  its  surrender.  Then,  in  November,  he  had
used  railroads  to  rescue  an  endangered  Union  army
near Chattanooga, Tennessee. Grant believed that the
cautious  tactics  of  previous  Union  commanders  had
prolonged  the  war.  He  was  willing  to  accept  heavy
casualties, a stance that earned him a reputation as a
butcher of enemy armies and his own men.

In May 1864, Grant ordered two major offensives.
Personally taking charge of the 115,000-man Army of
the Potomac, he set out to destroy Lee’s force of 75,000
troops in Virginia. Grant instructed General William
Tecumseh Sherman, who shared his harsh outlook, to
invade  Georgia  and  take  Atlanta.  “All  that  has  gone
before  is  mere  skirmish,”  Sherman  wrote  as  he  pre-
pared for battle. “The war now begins.”

Grant advanced toward Richmond, hoping to force
Lee to fight in open fields, where the Union’s superior
manpower and artillery would prevail. Remembering
his  tactical  errors  at  Gettysburg,  Lee  remained  in
strong defensive positions and attacked only when he
held an advantage. The Confederate general seized that
opportunity twice in May 1864, winning costly victo-
ries at the battles of the Wilderness and Spotsylvania
Court  House.  At  Spotsylvania,  the  troops  fought  at

point-blank range; an Iowa recruit
recalled  “lines  of  blue  and  grey
[soldiers  firing]  into  each  other’s
faces;  for  an  hour  and  a  half.”
Despite  heavy  losses  in  these
battles  and  then  at  Cold  Harbor,
Grant  drove  on  (Map  14.5).  His
attacks severely eroded Lee’s forces,
which suffered 31,000 casualties, but Union losses were
even higher: 55,000 killed or wounded.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the Emancipation
Proclamation and Grant’s
appointment as general in
chief affect the course of
the war?

Stalemate  The fighting took a heavy psychological
toll. “Many a man has gone crazy since this campaign
began from the terrible pressure on mind and  body,”
observed a Union captain. As morale declined, soldiers
deserted. In June 1864, Grant laid siege to Petersburg,
an  important  railroad  center  near  Richmond.  As  the
siege continued, Union and Confederate soldiers built
complex  networks  of  trenches,  tunnels,  and  artillery
emplacements stretching for 40 miles along the eastern
edge of Richmond and Petersburg, foreshadowing the
devastating trench warfare in France in World War I.
Invoking  the  intense  imagery  of  the  Bible,  an  officer
described the continuous artillery barrages and sniping

