468

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

Grant Planning a Strategic
Maneuver

On May 21, 1864, the day this photo-
graph was taken, Grant pulled his
forces from Spotsyl vania Court House,
where a bitter two-week battle (May
8–21) resulted in 18,000 Union and
10,000 Confederate cas ualties.
He moved his army to the southeast,
seeking to outﬂank Lee’s forces.
Photographer Timothy H. O’Sullivan
caught up to the Union army’s high
command at Massaponax Church,
Virginia, and captured this image of
Grant (to the left) leaning over a pew
and reading a map held by General
George H. Meade. As Grant plots the
army’s movement, his ofﬁcers smoke
their pipes and read reports of the war
in newspapers that had just arrived
from New York City. Intercepting
Grant’s forces, Lee took up fortiﬁed
positions ﬁrst at the North Anna River
and then at Cold Harbor, where the
Confederates scored their last major
victory of the war (May 31–June 3).
Library of Congress.

as “living night and day within the ‘valley of the shadow
of death.’ ” The stress was especially great for the out-
numbered  Confederate  troops,  who  spent  months  in
the muddy, hellish trenches without rotation to the rear.
As time passed, Lincoln and Grant felt pressures of
their own. The enormous casualties and military stale-
mate threatened Lincoln with defeat in the November
election.  The  Republican  outlook  worsened  in  July,
when  Jubal  Early’s  cavalry  raided  and  burned  the
Pennsylvania  town  of  Chambersburg  and  threatened
Washington.  To  punish  farmers  in  the  Shenandoah
Valley who had aided the Confederate raiders, Grant
ordered General Philip H. Sheridan to turn the region
into  “a  barren  waste.”  Sheridan’s  troops  conducted  a
scorched-earth  campaign,  destroying  grain,  barns,
and  gristmills  and  any  other  resource  useful  to  the
Confederates.  These  tactics,  like  Early’s  raid,  violated
the military norms of the day, which treated civilians as
noncombatants.  Rising  desperation  and  anger  were
changing the definition of conventional warfare.

The Election of 1864
and Sherman’s March
As the siege at Petersburg dragged on, Lincoln’s hopes
for  reelection  depended  on  General  Sherman  in
Georgia.  Sherman’s  army  of  90,000  men  had  moved

methodically toward Atlanta, a railway hub at the heart
of  the  Confederacy.  General  Joseph  E.  Johnson’s
Confederate army of 60,000 stood  in his way and, in
June  1864,  inflicted  heavy  casualties  on  Sherman’s
forces near Kennesaw Mountain, Georgia. By late July,
the  Union  army  stood  on  the  northern  outskirts  of
Atlanta,  but  the  next  month  brought  little  gain.  Like
Grant,  Sherman  seemed  bogged  down  in  a  hopeless
campaign.

The  National  Union  Party  Versus  the  Peace
Democrats  Meanwhile,  the  presidential  campaign
of 1864 was heating up. In June, the Republican Party’s
convention  rebuffed  attempts  to  prevent  Lincoln’s
renomination. It endorsed the president’s war strategy,
demanded the Confederacy’s unconditional surrender,
and called for a constitutional amendment to abolish
slavery.  The  delegates  likewise  embraced  Lincoln’s
political  strategy.  To  attract  border-state  and  Demo-
cratic  voters,  the  Republicans  took  a  new  name,  the
National  Union  Party,  and  chose  Andrew  Johnson,  a
Tennessee  slave  owner  and  Unionist  Democrat,  as
Lincoln’s running mate.

The  Democratic  Party  met  in  August  and  nomi-
nated  General  George  B.  McClellan  for  president.
Lincoln  had  twice  removed  McClellan  from  military
commands: first for an excess of caution and then for

