CHAPTER 14

  Two Societies at War, 1861–1865

469

MAP 14.5
The Closing Virginia Campaign,
1864–1865

Beginning in May 1864, General
Ulysses S. Grant launched an all-out
campaign against Richmond, trying
to lure Gen eral Robert E. Lee into
open battle. Lee avoided a major test
of strength. Instead, he retreated to
defensive positions and inﬂicted heavy
casualties on Union attackers at the
Wilderness, Spotsylvania Court House,
North Anna, and Cold Harbor (1–4).
From June 1864 to April 1865, the two
armies faced each other across defensive
fortiﬁcations out side Richmond and
Petersburg (5). Grant ﬁnally broke this
ten-month siege by a ﬂanking maneuver
at Five Forks (6). Lee’s surrender
followed shortly.

Grant

Lee

Confederate defense line

Confederate victory

Union victory

Railroads

1

Sequence of battles

1

The Wilderness
May 5–7, 1864

Rapidan R.

Orange
Court
House

Spotsylvania
May 8–19, 1864

2

c R.
a
m
o
t
o
P

Chancellorsville

Fredericksburg

Rappahannock R.

3

North Anna
May 23–26, 1864

W

N

S

E

James R.

8

Appomattox Court House,
Lee surrenders to Grant,
April 9, 1865

0

0

20

40 miles

20

40 kilometers

Richmond

Appomattox R.

Sayler's Creek
April 6,1865

Amelia
Court
House

7

6

Five Forks,
April 1, 1865

Cold
Harbor
June 1–3,
1864

4

5

Petersburg
campaign
June 1864–
April 1865

his  opposition  to  emancipation.  Like  McClellan,  the
Democratic delegates rejected emancipation and con-
demned Lincoln’s repression of domestic dissent, par-
ticularly the suspension of habeas corpus and the use
of military courts to prosecute civilians. However, they
split into two camps over war policy. War  Democrats
vowed to continue fighting until the rebellion ended,
while Peace Democrats called for a “cessation of hos-
tilities” and a constitutional convention to negotiate a
peace  settlement.  Although  personally  a  War  Demo-
crat, McClellan promised if elected to recommend to
Congress an immediate armistice and a peace conven-
tion.  Hearing  this  news,  Confederate  vice  president
Alexander  Stephens  celebrated  “the  first  ray  of  real
light  I  have  seen  since  the  war  began.”  He  predicted
that if Atlanta and Richmond held out, Lincoln would
be defeated and McClellan would eventually accept an
independent Confederacy.

The Fall of Atlanta and Lincoln’s Victory  Stephens’s
hopes collapsed on September 2, 1864, as Atlanta fell to
Sherman’s army. In a stunning move, the Union gen-
eral pulled his troops from the trenches, swept around
the city, and destroyed its rail links to the south. Fearing
that  Sherman  would  encircle  his  army,  Confederate
general John B. Hood abandoned the city. “Atlanta is
ours,  and  fairly  won,”  Sherman  telegraphed  Lincoln,
sparking  hundred-gun  salutes  and  wild  Republican

celebration. “We are gaining strength,” Lincoln warned
Confederate leaders, “and may, if need be, maintain the
contest indefinitely.”

A  deep  pessimism  settled  over  the  Confederacy.
Mary Chesnut, a plantation mistress and general’s wife,
wrote in her diary, “I felt as if all were dead within me,
forever,” and foresaw the end of the Confederacy: “We
are going to be wiped off the earth.” Recognizing the
dramatically  changed  military  situation,  McClellan
repudiated  the  Democratic  peace  platform.  The
National Union Party went on the offensive, attacking
McClellan’s  inconsistency  and  labeling  Peace  Demo-
crats  as  “copperheads”  (poisonous  snakes)  who  were
hatching  treasonous  plots.  “A  man  must  go  for  the
Union at all hazards,” declared a Republican legislator
in Pennsylvania, “if he would entitle himself to be con-
sidered a loyal man.”

Lincoln won a clear-cut victory in November. The
president received 55 percent of the popular vote and
won  212  of  233  electoral  votes.  Republicans  and
National Unionists captured 145 of the 185 seats in the
House  of  Representatives  and  increased  their  Senate
majority  to  42  of  52  seats.  Many  Republicans  owed
their victory to the votes of Union troops, who wanted
to crush the rebellion and end slavery.

Legal emancipation was already under way at the
edges  of  the  South.  In  1864,  Maryland  and  Missouri
amended  their  constitutions  to  end  slavery,  and  the

