470

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

people  whom  I  best  love.”  Serving  under  Grant,
Sherman  distinguished  himself  at  Shiloh  and  Vicks-
burg. Taking command of the Army of the Tennessee,
he developed the philosophy and tactics of “hard war.”
“When one nation is at war with another, all the people
of  one  are  enemies  of  the  other,”  Sherman  declared.
When Confederate guerrillas fired on a boat carrying
Unionist civilians near Randolph, Tennessee, Sherman
sent a regiment to destroy the town, asserting, “We are
justified in treating all inhabitants as combatants.”

After capturing Atlanta, Sherman advocated a bold
strategy. Instead of pursuing the retreating Confederate
army northward into Tennessee, he proposed to move
south, live off the land, and “cut a swath through to the
sea.”  To  persuade  Lincoln  and  Grant  to  approve  his
unconventional  plan,  Sherman  argued  that  his  march
would  be  “a  demonstration  to  the  world,  foreign  and
domestic, that we have a power [Jefferson] Davis cannot
resist.” The Union general lived up to his pledge. “We are
not only fighting hostile armies,” Sherman wrote, “but a
hostile people, and must make old and young, rich and
poor, feel the hard hand of war.” He left Atlanta in flames,
and during his 300-mile March to the Sea (Map 14.6)
his  army  consumed  or  demolished  everything  in  its
path.  A  Union  veteran  wrote,  “[We]  destroyed  all  we
could  not  eat,  stole  their  niggers,  burned  their  cotton
&  gins,  spilled  their  sorghum,  burned  &  twisted  their
R.Roads and raised Hell generally.” Although Sherman’s
army usually did not harm noncombatants who kept to
their  peaceful  business,  the  havoc  so  demoralized
Confederate  soldiers  that  many  deserted  their  units
and  returned  home  (American  Voices,  p.  472).  When
Sherman reached Savannah in mid-December, the city’s
10,000 defenders left without a fight.

Georgia’s African Americans treated Sherman as a
savior.  “They  flock  to  me,  old  and  young,”  he  wrote.
“[T]hey  pray  and  shout  and  mix  up  my  name  with
Moses . . . as well as ‘Abram Linkom,’ the Great Messiah
of ‘Dis Jubilee.’ ” To provide for the hundreds of blacks
now following his army, Sherman issued Special Field
Order No. 15, which set aside 400,000 acres of prime
rice-growing  land  for  the  exclusive  use  of  freedmen.
By  June  1865,  about  40,000  blacks  were  cultivating
“Sherman  lands.”  Many  freedmen  believed  that  the
lands  were  to  be  theirs  forever,  belated  payment  for
generations  of  unpaid  labor:  “All  the  land  belongs  to
the Yankees now and they gwine divide it out among
de coloured people.”

To see more of Sherman’s writing, along with other
primary sources from this period, see Sources for
America’s History.

William Tecumseh Sherman

A man of nervous energy, Sherman smoked cigars and talked
continuously. When seated, he crossed and uncrossed his legs
incessantly, and a journalist described his ﬁngers as constantly
“twitching his red whiskers — his coat buttons — playing a
tattoo on the table — or running through his hair.” On the
battleﬁeld Sherman was a decisive general who commanded
the loyalty of his troops. A photographer captured this image
of Sherman in 1865, following his devastating march through
Georgia and the Carolinas. Library of Congress.

three Confederate states occupied by the Union army —
Tennessee,  Arkansas,  and  Louisiana — followed  suit.
Still,  abolitionists  worried  that  the  Emancipation
Proclamation, based legally on the president’s wartime
powers, would lose its force at the end of the war. Urged
on by Lincoln and the National Equal Rights League, in
January  1865  the  Republican  Congress  approved  the
Thirteenth Amendment, ending slavery, and sent it to
the states for ratification. Slavery was nearly dead.

William Tecumseh  Sherman: “Hard War” Warrior
Thanks  to  William  Tecumseh  Sherman,  the  Confed-
eracy was nearly dead as well. As a young military offi-
cer stationed in the South, Sherman sympathized with
the planter class and felt that slavery upheld social sta-
bility.  However,  Sherman  believed  in  the  Union.
Secession meant “anarchy,” he told his southern friends
in  early  1861:  “If  war  comes . . . I  must  fight  your

