CHAPTER 14

  Two Societies at War, 1861–1865

471

In February 1865, Sherman invaded South Carolina
to punish the instigators of nullification and secession.
His troops ravaged the countryside as they cut a nar-
row  swath  across  the  state.  After  capturing  South
Carolina’s capital, Columbia, they burned the business
district, most churches, and the wealthiest residential
neighborhoods.  “This  disappointment
is
extremely bitter,” lamented Jefferson Davis. By March,
Sherman had reached North Carolina, ready to link up
with Grant and crush Lee’s army.

to  me

their  infurnal  negroes,”  grumbled  an  Alabama  hill
farmer. More and more soldiers fled their units. “I am
now going to work instead of to the war,” vowed David
Harris, another backcountry yeoman. By 1865, at least
100,000  men  had  deserted  from  Confederate  armies,
prompting  reluctant  Confederate  leaders  to  approve
the  enlistment  of  black  soldiers  and  promising  them
freedom.  However,  the  fighting  ended  too  soon  to
reveal  whether  any  slaves  would  have  fought  for  the
Confederacy.

The Confederate Collapse  Grant’s war of attrition
in  Virginia  had  already  exposed  a  weakness  in  the
Confederacy:  rising  class  resentment  among  poor
whites. Angered by slave owners’ exemptions from mil-
itary  service  and  fearing  that  the  Confederacy  was
doomed,  ordinary  southern  farmers  now  repudiated
the  draft.  “All  they  want  is  to  git  you . . . to  fight  for

The  symbolic  end  of  the  war
took  place  in  Virginia.  In  April
1865, Grant finally gained control
of the crucial railroad junction at
Petersburg  and  forced  Lee  to
abandon  Richmond.  As  Lincoln
visited  the  ruins  of  the  Con-
federate capital, greeted by joyful

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
To what extent were Grant
and Sherman’s military
strategy and tactics
responsible for defeat
of the Confederacy?

KENTUCKY

VIRGINIA

6
Nashville
Dec. 15–16, 1864
(cid:8)

Franklin
Nov. 30, 1864

(cid:8)

5

(cid:2)

Pulaski

ALABAMA

TennesseeR.

TENNESSEE

Murfreesboro

(cid:2)

2

Chattanooga
Nov. 23–25, 1863

(cid:8)
(cid:8)

Chickamauga
Sept. 20, 1863
1

Kennesaw Mt.
June 27, 1864

(cid:8)

3

(cid:8)

Atlanta
July 20, 22, 28,
Sept. 2, 1864
4

Union
Movements

Confederate
Movements

Rosecrans
Sherman
Schofield
Thomas
Fort

(cid:9)

Bragg-Johnston
Johnston
Hood
Confederate
victory
Union victory

(cid:8)

(cid:8)

Railroads
Sequence of battles

1

(cid:2)

Macon

GEORGIA

NORTH
CAROLINA

Johnston Surrenders
April 18, 1865
10

Raleigh

(cid:4)

SOUTH CAROLINA

Columbia
Feb. 17, 1865
8

(cid:2)

Fayettesville

(cid:4)

Charleston
(cid:2)
(cid:9)

Ft. Sumter

Goldsboro
(cid:4)

(cid:8)
Bentonville
March 19, 1865
9

Wilmington

(cid:4)

N

W

E

S

(cid:2)
(cid:9)

Savannah
Dec. 20, 1864
7

Ft. Pulaski

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

0

0

50

100 miles

50

100 kilometers

MAP 14.6
Sherman’s March Through the Confederacy, 1864–1865

The Union victory in November 1863 at Chattanooga, Tennessee (2), was almost as critical as the
victories in July at Gettysburg and Vicksburg, because it opened up a route of attack into the heart
of the Confederacy. In mid-1864, General William Tecumseh Sherman advanced on the railway hub
of Atlanta (3 and 4). After ﬁnally taking the city in September 1864, Sherman relied on other Union
armies to stem General Hood’s invasion of Tennessee (5 and 6) while he began his devastating
March to the Sea. By December, he had reached Savannah (7); from there, he cut a swath through
the Carolinas (8–10).

