A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Gender, Class, and

Sexual Terror in the

Invaded South

Cornelia Peake McDonald
Journal

When the white men of the South marched off to war, they left behind their
wives and children. Soon, Confederate women in the border states confronted
an enemy army of occupation. Later, when Union armies invaded the Confed-
eracy, southern women — both black and white — faced an even more danger-
ous army of conquest and destruction.

Cornelia  Peake  McDonald  was  the  wife  of  an  afﬂuent
lawyer in Winchester, Virginia, a town occupied by Union
forces. She had nine children, born between 1848 and 1861.

[May 1863] 22nd . . . To day I received another intimation
that my house would be wanted for a [Union] regimental
hospital. I feel a sickening despair when I think of what
will be my condition if they do take it. . . .

Major Butterworth . . . told me that he was a quarter
master, and that he had been sent to inform me that I must
give up the house, as they must have it for a hospital. . . .
I lost no time in seeking [General] Milroy’s presence. . . .
“Gen. Milroy,” said I. He looked around impatiently.
“They have come to take my house from me.” . . . [He
replied,] “Why should you expect me to shelter you and
your family, you who are a rebel, and whose husband and
family are in arms against the best government the world
ever saw?” . . . “But Gen. Milroy, you are commandant
here . . . and you can suffer me to remain in mine, where
at least I can have a shelter for my sick children.” . . . At
last he raised his head and looked in my face. “You can
stay but I allow it at the risk of my commission.”

Source: A Woman’s Civil War, ed. Minrose C. Gwin (Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press, 1992), 101, 150–153.

Judith White Brockenbrough McGuire
Diary

Judith  White  Brockenbrough  McGuire,  of  Alexandria,
Virginia, spent most of the war as a refugee in Richmond.

June 11, 1865
These particulars . . . I have [heard] from our nephew,
J. P. [in occupied central Virginia. He reports that] . . . the
Northern officers seemed disposed to be courteous to the
ladies, in the little intercourse which they had with them.
General Ferrera, who commanded the negro troops, was
humane, in having a coffin made for a young Confederate
officer. . . . The surgeons, too, assisted in attending to the

472

Confederate wounded. An officer one morning sent for
Mrs. N. [to return an item stolen by Union soldiers]. . . .
She thanked him for his kindness. He seemed moved and
said, “Mrs. N., I will do what I can for you, for I cannot be
too thankful that my wife is not in an invaded country.”

Source: Rod Gragg, The Illustrated Confederate Reader (New York: Harper & Row,
1989), 88–89.

Lieutenant Colonel Samuel J. Nasmith
Report, July 1, 1863

In  June  1863,  Confederate  raiders  attacked  and  burned
twenty  Union-run  cotton  plantations  near  Goodrich’s
Landing, Louisiana, along the Mississippi River. They cap-
tured  1,200  African  American  refugees  and  took  ven-
geance on many others, including women and children. A
report by Colonel Nasmith of the 25th Wisconsin Infantry
related the gruesome details.

Major Farnan, commanding the cavalry, reports that the
scenes witnessed by him . . . were of a character never
before witnessed in a civilized country. . . . They spared
neither age, sex, nor condition. In some instances the
Negroes were shut up in their quarters, and literally
roasted alive. The charred remains found in numerous
instances testified to a degree of fiendish atrocity such
as has no parallel either in civilized or savage warfare.
Young children, only five or six years of age, were found
skulking in the cane break with wounds, while helpless
women were found shot down in the most inhumane
manner. The whole country was destroyed, and every
sign of civilization was given to the flames.

Source: The War of the Rebellion: A Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and
Confederate Armies (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1889), Series 1, Vol.
24 (Part II), 517.

Anna Maria Green
Diary

Twenty-year-old  Anna  Maria  Green  kept  a  diary  as  Gen-
eral  William  Tecumseh  Sherman’s  army  of  60,000  men
approached Milledgeville, Georgia.

