Saturday evening November 19th [1864] — Again we are
in a state of excitement caused by the near approach to
our town of the enemy. Last night they were two thou-
sand strong at Monticello. . . . Minnie came in to call me
to look at a fire in the west. My heart sank, and almost
burst with grief as I beheld the horizon crimson and the
desolation our hated foe was spreading. Great God!
Deliver us, oh! Spare our city. . . .

Nov. 25th Friday evening . . . This morning the last
of the vandals left our city and burned the bridge after
them — leaving suffering and desolation behind them,
and embittering every heart. The worst of their acts was
committed to poor Mrs. Nichols — violence done, and
atrocity committed that ought to make her husband an
enemy unto death. Poor woman. I fear she has been
driven crazy.

Source: Rod Gragg, The Illustrated Confederate Reader (New York: Harper & Row,
1989), 175–176.

Unknown Woman
Letter to Her Daughter

Daniel Heyward Trezevant
Report

Daniel  Heyward  Trezevant,  a  doctor  in  Columbia,  South
Carolina, wrote a brief report after Sherman’s departure.

The Yankees’ gallantry, brutality and debauchery were
afflicted on the negroes. . . . The case of Mr. Shane’s old
negro woman, who, after being subjected to the most bru-
tal indecency from seven of the Yankees, was, at the prop-
osition of one of them to “finish the old Bitch,” put into a
ditch and held under water until life was extinct. . . .

Mrs. T. B. C. was seized by one of the soldiers, an offi-
cer, and dragged by the hair and forced to the floor for the
purpose of sensual enjoyment. She resisted as far as prac-
tical — held up her young infant as a plea for sparing her
and succeeded, but they took her maid, and in her pres-
ence, threw her on the floor and had connection with
her. . . . They pinioned Mrs. McCord and robbed her.
They dragged Mrs. Gynn by the hair of her head about
the house. Mrs. G. told me of a young lady about 16, Miss
Kinsler, who . . . three officers brutally ravished and who
became crazy.

This  letter  was  written  by  a  woman  in  Columbia,  South
Carolina.

Source: Rod Gragg, The Illustrated Confederate Reader (New York: Harper & Row,
1989), 192.

Columbia March 3, 1865
My dear Gracia

Doubtless your anxiety is very great to hear some-
thing about us after the great calamity that has befallen
our town. We have lost everything, but thank God, our
lives have been spared. Oh Gracia, what we have passed
through no tongue can tell, it defies description! . . .

The first regiment sent into the city was what Sherman
calls his “Tigers.” Whenever he sends these men ahead, he
intends to do his worst. . . . The first thing they did was
break open the stores and distribute the goods right and
left. They found liquor and all became heartily drunk. . . .
When night came on, the soldiers . . . fired the houses. It
was a fearful sight. . . .

We stayed all night in the street, protected by a Yankee

Captain from Iowa who was very kind to us.

Source: Rod Gragg, The Illustrated Confederate Reader (New York: Harper & Row,
1989), 189–190.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  How might class loyalties and shared cultural values

have inﬂuenced General Milroy’s decision to let Cornelia
McDonald stay in her home? How do the actions of the
“Yankee Captain from Iowa” compare with Milroy’s?
2.  Although none of these writers used the word rape
(why not?), we can assume that Mrs. Nichols was
raped, as were Miss Kinsler and the enslaved African
American maid in Columbia. What about Mrs. T. B. C.,
Mrs. McCord, and Mrs. Gynn? How should we evalu-
ate the credibility of these sources (and other, similar
accounts written by whites) when they assert or imply
that Union troops raped enslaved women and spared
white women?

3.  How should we compare the brutal actions of Confeder-
ate soldiers toward fugitive blacks and the treatment of
southern women by Sherman’s troops? Explain why they
do — or do not — represent the same kind of wartime
military misconduct.

473

