474

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

ex-slaves,  Grant  cut  off  Lee’s  escape  route  to  North
Carolina. On April 9, almost four years to the day after
the  attack  on  Fort  Sumter,  Lee  surrendered  at  Appo-
mattox Court House, Virginia. In return for their prom-
ise not to fight again, Grant allowed the Confederate
officers  and  men  to  go  home.  By  late  May,  all  of  the
secessionist  armies  and  governments  had  simply
melted away (Map 14.7).

The hard and bitter conflict was finally over. North-
ern  armies  had  preserved  the  Union  and  destroyed
slavery;  many  of  the  South’s  factories,  railroads,  and
cities  lay  in  ruins;  and  its  farms  and  plantations  had
suffered years of neglect. Almost 260,000 Confederate
soldiers had paid for secession with their lives. On the
other  side,  more  than  360,000  northerners  had  died
for the Union, and thousands more had been maimed.
Was it all worth the price? Delivering his second inau-
gural  address  in  March  1865 — less  than  a  month

before  his  assassination — Abraham  Lincoln  could
justify the hideous carnage only by alluding to divine
providence: “[S]o still it must be said ‘the judgments of
the Lord are true and righteous altogether.’ ”

What of the war’s effects on society? A New York
census  taker  suggested  that  the  conflict  had  under-
mined  “autocracy”  and  had  an  “equalizing  effect.”
Slavery was gone from the South, he reflected, and in
the  North,  “military  men  from  the  so  called  ‘lower
classes’ now lead society, having been elevated by real
merit  and  valor.”  However  perceptive  these  remarks,
they ignored the wartime emergence of a new finan-
cial  aristocracy  that  would  soon  preside  over  what
Mark  Twain  labeled  the  Gilded  Age.  Nor  was  the
sectional struggle yet concluded. As the North began
to  reconstruct  the  South  and  the  Union,  it  found
those tasks to be almost as hard and bitter as the war
itself.

Pittsburgh

Philadelphia

Cincinnati

St. Louis

Ohio R.

Louisville

Mississippi R.

Memphis

Corinth

Nashville

Chattanooga

Lynchburg

Raleigh

Charlotte

Camden

Columbia

Baltimore

Washington, D.C.

Richmond

W

Norfolk

N

S

E

ATL A N T I C
O CEA N

Goldsboro

Fayetteville

0

0

100

200 miles

100

200 kilometers

Atlanta

Augusta

Charleston

Southern limit of free states
at beginning of war

Vicksburg

Montgomery

Savannah

Mobile

Baton Rouge

Pensacola

New Orleans

Gulf of Mexico

Jacksonville

Union gains in:
1861
1862
1863
1864
1865
Never invaded nor occupied
by Union forces

MAP 14.7
The Conquest of the South, 1861–1865

It took four years for the Union armies to defeat the Confederate forces. Until 1864, most of the
South remained in Confederate hands; even at the end of the war, Union armies had never entered
many parts of the rebellious states. Most of the Union’s territorial gains came on the vast western
front, where its control of strategic lines of communication (the Ohio and Mississippi rivers and
major railroads) gave its forces a decisive advantage.

