CHAPTER 14

  CHAPTER REVIEW

475

SUMMARY
In this chapter, we surveyed the dramatic events of the
Civil War. Looking at the South, we watched the fire-
eaters declare secession, form a new Confederacy, and
attack Fort Sumter. Subsequently, we saw its generals
repulse Union attacks against Richmond and go on the
offensive. However, as the war continued, the inherent
weaknesses  of  the  Confederacy  came  to  the  fore.
Enslaved workers fled or refused to work, and yeomen
farmers refused to fight for an institution that primarily
benefitted wealthy planters.

Examining  the  North,  we  witnessed  its  military
shortcomings. Its generals — McClellan and Meade —
moved slowly to attack and did not pursue their weak-
ened foes. However, the Union’s significant advantages
in industrial output, financial resources, and military
manpower became manifest over time. Congress cre-
ated  efficient  systems  of  banking  and  war  finance,
Lincoln found efficient and ruthless generals, and the
emancipation  and  recruitment  of  African  Americans
provided an abundant supply of soldiers determined to
end slavery.

We explored the impact of the war on civilians in
both regions: the imposition of conscription and high
taxes, the increased workload of farm women, and the
constant food shortages and soaring prices. Above all
else, there was the omnipresent fact of death — a trag-
edy that touched nearly every family, North and South.

An Uncounted Casualty of the War

Many men who died in the war were husbands and
fathers, leaving tens of thousands of widows — and even
more children — to grieve over their loss. Dressed in mourn-
ing clothes, this unidentiﬁed, sad-faced young girl holds an
image of her dead father, a cavalryman holding a sword
and wearing a regulation dress hat. Library of Congress.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

Crittenden Compromise (p. 446)
total war (p. 452)
draft (conscription) (p. 452)
habeas corpus (p. 454)
King Cotton (p. 456)
greenbacks (p. 460)
“contrabands” (p. 463)
Radical Republicans (p. 463)

Emancipation Proclamation

(p. 464)

scorched-earth campaign (p. 468)
War and Peace Democrats

(p. 469)

“hard war” (p. 470)
March to the Sea (p. 470)

Key People

Abraham Lincoln (p. 444)
Jefferson Davis (p. 446)
Robert E. Lee (p. 448)
George McClellan (p. 449)
Ulysses S. Grant (p. 466)
William T. Sherman (p. 470)

