476

PART 5

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  Based  on  the  evidence  presented  in  this  chapter,
did  Lee’s  surrender  at  Appomattox  and  Grant’s
magnanimity to the defeated forces save the nation
from a drawn-out guerrilla war, as some historians
have argued? Or, as other scholars have suggested,
did  the  events  at  Appomattox  undermine  black
emancipation by giving a high priority to the rec-
onciliation of northern and southern whites?

2.  In  1860,  the  institution  of  slavery  was  firmly
entrenched  in  the  United  States;  by  1865,  it  was
dead.  How  did  this  happen?  How  and  why  did

Union  policy  toward  slavery  and  enslaved  people
change over the course of the war?

3.  THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING  The thematic
timeline for Part 5 (p. 409) lists six events or devel-
opments in the 1860s relating directly to the South’s
secession and the Civil War. Does that list capture
the war’s overwhelming importance to the history
of nineteenth-century America? If not, is this defi-
ciency  inherent  to  timelines,  or  does  it  reflect  a
faulty  construction  of  this  specific  timeline?  How
would you address this problem?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS TIME AND PLACE  After reviewing
the compromises over slavery at the Constitutional
Convention (p. 206), in the Missouri Compromise
(p. 269), and in the Compromise of 1850 (p. 429),
write  an  essay  analyzing  why  the  opposing  sides
failed to compromise in 1861.

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  The  photographs  of  the
Southern  Refugee  Family  (p.  462)  and  Grant
Planning a Strategic Maneuver (p. 468) remind us
of  a  world  in  which  people,  goods,  and  soldiers
moved either on foot or on horses and mules. How
did this limited mobility affect civilians — slave and
free — and military forces during the Civil War?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Dora L. Costa and Matthew E. Kahn, Heroes and Cow-
ards: The Social Face of War (2008). Demonstrates the
role of friendship and community in soldiers’ wartime
behavior.

Drew Gilpin Faust, This Republic of Suffering: Death
and the American Civil War (2008). Examines the
cultural changes prompted by massive casualties.

William W. Freehling, The South vs. the South (2001).
Explores anti-Confederate sentiment in the South.

Gary W. Gallagher, The Confederate War (1997).
Views the fighting from the perspective of the seces-
sionists.

Earl J. Hess, The Union Soldier in Battle (1997). Vividly
describes the smell, sound, and feel of combat.

James M. McPherson, The Battle Cry of Freedom
(1988). A fine narrative history of the Civil War.

