15

C H A P T E R

THE STRUGGLE
FOR NATIONAL
RECONSTRUCTION

Presidential Approaches: From

Lincoln to Johnson

Congress Versus the President

Radical Reconstruction

Woman Suffrage Denied

THE MEANING OF
FREEDOM

The Quest for Land

Republican Governments

in the South

Building Black Communities

THE UNDOING OF
RECONSTRUCTION
The Republicans Unravel

Counterrevolution in the South

Reconstruction Rolled Back

The Political Crisis of 1877

Lasting Legacies

478

Reconstruction
1865–1877

On the last day of April 1866, black

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
What  goals  did  Republican  policy-
makers, ex-Confederates, and freed-
people  pursue  during  Reconstruc-
tion?  To  what  degree  did  each
succeed?

soldiers  in  Memphis,  Tennessee,
turned  in  their  weapons  as  they
mustered out of the Union army. The next
day,  whites  who  resented  the  soldiers’
presence provoked a clash. At a street cel-
ebration where African Americans shouted
“Hurrah for Abe Lincoln,” a white policeman responded, “Your old father, Abe Lincoln,
is dead and damned.” The scufﬂe that followed precipitated three days of white vio-
lence and rape that left forty-eight African Americans dead and dozens more wounded.
Mobs  burned  black  homes  and  churches  and  destroyed  all  twelve  of  the  city’s  black
schools.

Unionists were appalled. They had won the Civil War, but where was the peace?
Ex-Confederates murdered freedmen and ﬂagrantly resisted federal control. After the
Memphis attacks, Republicans in Congress proposed a new measure that would protect
African Americans by deﬁning and enforcing U.S. citizenship rights. Eventually this bill
became  the  most  signiﬁcant  law  to  emerge  from  Reconstruction,  the  Fourteenth
Amendment to the Constitution.

Andrew  Johnson,  however — the  Unionist  Democrat  who  became  president  after
Abraham Lincoln’s assassination — refused to sign the bill. In May 1865, while Congress
was  adjourned,  Johnson  had  implemented  his  own  Reconstruction  plan.  It  extended
amnesty to all southerners who took a loyalty oath, except for a few high-ranking Con-
federates. It also allowed states to reenter the Union as soon as they revoked secession,
abolished  slavery,  and  relieved  their  new  state  governments  of  ﬁnancial  burdens  by
repudiating Confederate debts. A year later, at the time of the Memphis carnage, all
ex-Confederate  states  had  met  Johnson’s  terms.  The  president  rejected  any  further
intervention.

Johnson’s vetoes, combined with ongoing violence in the South, angered Unionist
voters. In the political struggle that ensued, congressional Republicans seized the initia-
tive from the president and enacted a sweeping program that became known as Radical
Reconstruction. One of its key achievements would have been unthinkable a few years
earlier: voting rights for African American men.

Black Southeners, though, had additional, urgent priorities. “We have toiled nearly
all our lives as slaves [and] have made these lands what they are,” a group of South
Carolina petitioners declared. They pleaded for “some provision by which we as Freed-
men can obtain a Homestead.” Though northern Republicans and freedpeople agreed
that black southerners must have physical safety and the right to vote, former slaves
also wanted economic independence. Northerners sought, instead, to revive cash-crop
plantations with wage labor. Reconstruction’s eventual failure stemmed from the con-
ﬂicting goals of lawmakers, freedpeople, and relentlessly hostile ex-Confederates.

