480

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

The Struggle for National
Reconstruction
Congress  clashed  with  President  Johnson,  in  part,
because the framers of the Constitution did not antici-
pate  a  civil  war  or  provide  for  its  aftermath.  Had
Confederate  states  legally  left  the  Union  when  they
seceded?  If  so,  then  their  reentry  required  action  by
Congress.  If  not — if  even  during  secession  they  had
retained  U.S.  statehood — then  restoring  them  might
be an administrative matter, best left to the president.
Lack of clarity on this fundamental question made for
explosive politics.

Presidential Approaches:
From Lincoln to Johnson
As  wartime  president,  Lincoln  had  offered  a  plan
similar  to  Johnson’s.  It  granted  amnesty  to  most  ex-
Confederates  and  allowed  each  rebellious  state  to
return to the Union as soon as 10 percent of its voters
had  taken  a  loyalty  oath  and  the
state had approved the Thirteenth
Amend ment,  abolishing  slavery.
But even amid defeat, Confederate
states  rejected  this  Ten  Percent
Plan — an  ominous  sign  for  the

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did Lincoln and
Johnson approach Recon-
struction differently?

future. In July 1864, Congress proposed a tougher sub-
stitute,  the  Wade-Davis  Bill,  that  required  an  oath  of
allegiance by a majority of each state’s adult white men,
new governments formed only by those who had never
taken  up  arms  against  the  Union,  and  permanent
disenfranchisement  of  Confederate  leaders.  Lincoln
defeated the Wade-Davis Bill with a pocket veto, leav-
ing it unsigned when Congress adjourned. At the same
time,  he  opened  talks  with  key  congressmen,  aiming
for a compromise.

We  will  never  know  what  would  have  happened
had  Lincoln  lived.  His  assassination  in  April  1865
plunged the nation into political uncertainty. As a spe-
cial train bore the president’s flag-draped coffin home
to Illinois, thousands of Americans lined the railroad
tracks in mourning. Furious and grief-stricken, many
Unionists  blamed  all  Confederates  for  the  acts  of
southern  sympathizer  John  Wilkes  Booth  and  his
accomplices in the murder. At the same time, Lincoln’s
death  left  the  presidency  in  the  hands  of  Andrew
Johnson, a man utterly lacking in Lincoln’s moral sense
and political judgment.

Johnson was a self-styled “common man” from the
hills of eastern Tennessee. Trained as a tailor, he built
his political career on the support of farmers and labor-
ers. Loyal to the Union, Johnson had refused to leave
the U.S. Senate when Tennessee seceded. After federal
forces  captured  Nashville  in  1862,  Lincoln  appointed
Johnson as Tennessee’s military governor. In the election

Memphis Riot, 1866

Whites in postwar Memphis,
as in much of the South, bitterly
resented the presence in their city
of former black soldiers mustered
out of service with the U.S. Army.
On April 30, 1866, when some
black veterans — no longer pro-
tected by their uniforms —
celebrated the end of their army
service by drinking, violence broke
out. For three days, whites burned
black neigh borhoods, churches,
and schools, raped several Afri-
can American women, and killed
dozens of black residents. Two
whites also died in the rioting,
which hardened northern public
opinion and prompted calls for
stronger measures to put down
ex-Confederate resistance. This
tinted illustration is based on
a lithograph that appeared in
Harper’s Weekly. Harper’s Weekly/
Picture Research Consultants &
Archives.

