of 1864, placing Lincoln and this War Democrat on the
ticket together had seemed a smart move, designed to
promote  unity.  But  after  Lincoln’s  death,  Johnson’s
disagreement  with  Republicans,  combined  with  his
belligerent and contradictory actions, wreaked politi-
cal havoc.

The new president and Congress confronted a set
of problems that would have challenged even Lincoln.
During the war, Unionists had insisted that rebel lead-
ers were a small minority and most white southerners
wanted  to  rejoin  the  Union.  With  even  greater  opti-
mism,  Republicans  hoped  the  defeated  South  would
accept  postwar  reforms.  Ex-Confederates,  however,
contested that plan through both violence and political
action. New southern state legislatures, created under
Johnson’s  limited  Reconstruction  plan,  moved  to
restore slavery in all but name. In 1865, they enacted
Black  Codes,  designed  to  force  former  slaves  back  to
plantation  labor.  Like  similar  laws  passed  in  other
places after slavery ended, the codes reflected planta-
tion owners’ economic interests (America Compared,
p. 482). They imposed severe penalties on blacks who
did not hold full-year labor contracts and also set up
procedures for taking black children from their parents
and apprenticing them to former slave masters.

Faced  with  these  developments,  Johnson  gave  all
the  wrong  signals.  He  had  long  talked  tough  against
southern planters. But in practice, Johnson allied him-
self with ex-Confederate leaders, forgiving them when
they  appealed  for  pardons.  White  southern  leaders
were delighted. “By this wise and noble statesmanship,”
wrote a Confederate legislator, “you have become the
benefactor  of  the  Southern  people.”  Northerners  and
freedmen  were  disgusted.  The  president  had  left
Reconstruction  “to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  rebels,”
wrote  one  Republican.  An  angry  Union  veteran  in
Missouri called Johnson “a traitor to the loyal people of
the Union.” Emboldened by Johnson’s indulgence, ex-
Confederates  began  to  filter  back  into  the  halls  of
power.  When  Georgians  elected  Alexander  Stephens,
former vice president of the Confederacy, to represent
them  in  Congress,  many  outraged  Republicans  saw
this as the last straw.

Congress Versus the President
Under the Constitution, Congress is “the judge of the
Elections,  Returns  and  Qualifications  of  its  own
Members”  (Article  1,  Section  5).  Using  this  power,
Republican  majorities  in  both  houses  had  refused  to
admit southern delegations when Congress convened
in  December  1865,  effectively  blocking  Johnson’s

CHAPTER 15

  Reconstruction, 1865–1877

481

program. Hoping to mollify Congress, some southern
states dropped the most objectionable provisions from
their Black Codes. But at the same time, antiblack vio-
lence erupted in various parts of the South.

Congressional Republicans concluded that the fed-
eral government had to intervene. Back in March 1865,
Congress had established the Freedmen’s Bureau to aid
displaced blacks and other war refugees. In early 1866,
Congress  voted  to  extend  the  bureau,  gave  it  direct
funding for the first time, and authorized its agents to
investigate southern abuses. Even more extraordinary
was the  Civil  Rights  Act  of  1866, which declared for-
merly enslaved people to be citizens and granted them
equal protection and rights of contract, with full access
to the courts.

These  bills  provoked  bitter  conflict  with  Johnson,
who vetoed them both. Johnson’s racism, hitherto pub-
licly  muted,  now  blazed  forth:  “This  is  a  country  for
white men, and by God, as long as I am president, it shall
be  a  government  for  white  men.”  Galvanized,  Repub-
licans in Congress gathered two-thirds majorities and
overrode both vetoes, passing the Civil Rights Act in
April 1866 and the Freedmen’s Bureau law four months
later. Their resolve was reinforced by continued upheaval
in the South. In addition to the violence in Memphis,
twenty-four  black  political  leaders  and  their  allies  in
Arkansas were murdered and their homes burned.

Anxious to protect freedpeople and reassert Repub-
lican power in the South, Congress took further mea-
sures  to  sustain  civil  rights.  In  what  became  the
Fourteenth  Amendment  (1868),  it  declared  that  “all
persons born or naturalized in the United States” were
citizens.  No  state  could  abridge  “the  privileges  or
immunities  of  citizens  of  the  United  States”;  deprive
“any  person  of  life,  liberty,  or  property,  without  due
process of law”; or deny anyone “equal protection.” In a
stunning  increase  of  federal  power,  the  Fourteenth
Amendment  declared  that  when  people’s  essential
rights  were  at  stake,  national  citizenship  henceforth
took priority over citizenship in a state.

transformations

Johnson  opposed  ratification,  but  public  opinion
had  swung  against  him.  In  the  1866  congressional
elections,  voters  gave  Republicans  a  3-to-1  majority
in  Congress.  Power  shifted  to  the  so-called  Radical
Repub licans,  who  sought  sweep-
ing
the
defeated  South.  Radicals’  leader
in the Senate was Charles Sumner
of Massa chusetts, the fiery aboli-
tionist  who  in  1856  had  been
nearly  beaten  to  death  by  South
Caro lina  congressman  Preston

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
Under what circumstances
did the Fourteenth Amend-
ment win passage, and
what problems did its
authors seek to address?

in

