A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Labor Laws After

Emancipation: Haiti

and the United States

Many government officials agreed with former masters on the need to control
rural  workers.  Often  planters  themselves  or  allied  with  the  planter  class,  they
believed  that  economic  strength  and  public  revenue  depended  on  plantation
export crops and that workers would not produce those without legal coercion.
This was true in the British Caribbean and also Haiti, which eventually, after
a successful slave revolt ending in 1803, became an independent republic led by
former slaves and, in particular, by propertied free men of color. In the passage
below, a British observer describes a rural labor code adopted by Haiti’s govern-
ment in 1826. Despite the law, Haiti’s large plantations did not revive; the island’s
economy,  even  more  than  that  of  the  U.S.  South,  came  to  be  dominated  by
small-scale, impoverished farmers.

The Code of Laws before us is one that could only have
been framed by a legislature composed of proprietors of
land, having at their command a considerable military
power, of which they themselves were the leaders; for a
population whom it was necessary to compel to labour. . . .
The choice of a master, altho’ expressly reserved to the
labourer, is greatly modified by the clauses which restrain
the labourer from quitting the section of country to which
he belongs; and from the absence of any clause compelling
proprietors to engage him; so that the cultivator must
consent to bind himself to whomsoever may be willing
to engage him, or remain in prison, to be employed
among convicts. . . .

The Code begins (Article 1) by declaring Agriculture

to be the foundation of national prosperity; and then
decrees (Article 3), That all persons, excepting soldiers,
and civil servants of the State, professional persons, arti-
zans, and domestic servants, shall cultivate the soil. The
next clause (Article 4), forbids the inhabitants of the
country quitting it to dwell in towns or villages; and
every kind of wholesale or retail trade is forbidden
(Article 7) to be exercised by persons dwelling in the
country.

Further articles stipulate that any person dwelling in
the country, not being the owner or occupier of land, and
not having bound himself in the manner directed, . . .
shall be considered a vagabond, be arrested, and taken

before a Justice, who, after reading the Law to him, shall
commit him to jail, until he consent to bind himself
according to law.

. . . Those who are hired from a job-master [labor
agent], . . . are entitled to receive half the produce, after
deducting the expences of cultivation; [those who are
bound to the proprietor directly], one-fourth of the gross
produce of their labour. . . . Out of their miserable pit-
tance, these Haitian labourers are to provide themselves
and their children with almost every thing, and to lay by
a provision for old age. . . .

These, with the regulations already detailed, clearly
shew what is intended to be the condition of the labour-
ing population of Haiti. I must not call it slavery; the word
is objectionable; but few of the ingredients of slavery seem
to be wanting.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS
1.  Compare this Haitian law with the Black Codes briefly
adopted by ex-Confederate states, and with the share-
cropping system that evolved in the United States during
Reconstruction (p. 491). What did these labor systems —
or proposed systems — have in common? How did they
differ?

2.  Why would the Haitian government, led by men of color,
enact such laws? What considerations other than race
might have shaped their views, and why?

Brooks.  Radicals  in  the  House  followed  Thaddeus
Stevens  of  Pennsyl vania,  a  passionate  advocate  of
freedmen’s  political  and  economic  rights.  With  such
men  at  the  fore,  and  with  congressional  Republicans
now  numerous  and  united  enough  to  override
Johnson’s  vetoes  on  many  questions,  Congress  pro-
ceeded to remake Reconstruction.

Radical Reconstruction
The  Reconstruction  Act  of  1867,  enacted  in  March,
divided  the  conquered  South  into  five  military  dis-
tricts,  each  under  the  command  of  a  U.S.  general
(Map 15.1). To reenter the Union, former Confederate
states had to grant the vote to freedmen and deny it to

482

