CHAPTER 15

  Reconstruction, 1865–1877

483

MO.

ARK.
1868
1874

1870

Date of readmission to the Union

IOWA

1871

Date of defeat of radical
Reconstruction government

Military district boundary

Confederate states

COLO.

KANS.

IND.

ILL.

NEW MEXICO
TERRITORY

INDIAN
TERRITORY

TEXAS
1870
1873

MILITARY DISTRICT NO. 4

MISS.
1870
1875

LA.
1868
1877

MILITARY DISTRICT NO. 5

M E X I C O

0

0

100

200 miles

100 200 kilometers

Gulf of Mexico

OHIO

MD.

DEL.

PENN.

W. VA.

VA.
1870
1870

MILITARY DISTRICT
NO. 1

KY.

N.C.
1868
1870

MILITARY DISTRICT NO. 2

TENN.
1866
1869

ALA.
1868
1874

GA.
1870
1871

MILITARY DISTRICT NO. 3

N

W

E

S

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

S.C.
1868
1877

FLA.
1868
1877

MAP 15.1
Reconstruction
The federal government organized the Confederate states into five military districts during Radical
Reconstruction. For the states shown in this map, the first date indicates when that state was
readmitted to the Union; the second date shows when Radical Republicans lost control of the state
government. All the ex-Confederate states rejoined the Union between 1868 and 1870, but the
periods of Radical government varied widely. Republicans lasted only a few months in Virginia; they
held on until the end of Reconstruction in Louisiana, Florida, and South Carolina.

leading  ex-Confederates.  Each  military  commander
was required to register all eligible adult males, black as
well  as  white;  supervise  state  constitutional  conven-
tions;  and  ensure  that  new  constitutions  guaranteed
black suffrage. Congress would readmit a state to the
Union  once  these  conditions  were  met  and  the  new
state  legislature  ratified  the  Fourteenth  Amendment.
Johnson vetoed the Reconstruction Act, but Congress
overrode his veto (Table 15.1).

The Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
In August
1867, Johnson fought back by “suspending” Secretary
of War Edwin M. Stanton, a Radical, and replacing him
with Union general Ulysses S. Grant, believing Grant
would  be  a  good  soldier  and  follow  orders.  Johnson,
however, had misjudged Grant, who publicly objected
to  the  president’s  machinations.  When  the  Senate
overruled Stanton’s suspension, Grant — now an open

enemy of Johnson — resigned so Stanton could resume
his  place  as  secretary  of  war.  On  February  21,  1868,
Johnson formally dismissed Stanton. The feisty secre-
tary  of  war  responded  by  barricading  himself  in  his
office, precipitating a crisis.

Three  days  later,  for  the  first  time  in  U.S.  history,
legislators in the House of Representatives introduced
articles of impeachment against the president, employ-
ing  their  constitutional  power  to  charge  high  federal
officials with “Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes
and Misdemeanors.” The House serves, in effect, as the
prosecutor in such cases, and the Senate serves as the
court. The Republican majority brought eleven counts
of misconduct against Johnson, most relating to infringe-
ment of the powers of Congress. After an eleven-week
trial in the Senate, thirty-five senators voted for convic-
tion — one  vote  short  of  the  two-thirds  majority
required.  Twelve  Democrats  and  seven  Republicans

