484

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

TABLE 15.1

Primary Reconstruction Laws and Constitutional Amendments

Law (Date of Congressional Passage)

Key Provisions

Thirteenth Amendment (December 1865*)

Prohibited slavery

Civil Rights Act of 1866 (April 1866)

Defined citizenship rights of freedmen
Authorized federal authorities to bring suit against

those who violated those rights

Fourteenth Amendment (June 1866†)

Established national citizenship for persons born or

naturalized in the United States

Prohibited the states from depriving citizens of their

civil rights or equal protection under the law

Reduced state representation in House of

Representatives by the percentage of adult male
citizens denied the vote

Reconstruction Act of 1867 (March 1867)

Divided the South into five military districts, each

Tenure of Office Act (March 1867)

Fifteenth Amendment (February 1869‡)

under the command of a Union general
Established requirements for readmission of

ex-Confederate states to the Union

Required Senate consent for removal of any federal
official whose appointment had required Senate
confirmation

Forbade states to deny citizens the right to vote on
the grounds of race, color, or “previous condition
of servitude”

Ku Klux Klan Act (April 1871)

Authorized the president to use federal prosecutions

and military force to suppress conspiracies to
deprive citizens of the right to vote and enjoy the
equal protection of the law

*Ratified by three-fourths of all states in December 1865.
†Ratified by three-fourths of all states in July 1868.
‡Ratified by three-fourths of all states in March 1870.

voted for acquittal. The dissenting Republicans felt that
removing  a  president  for  defying  Congress  was  too
damaging  to  the  constitutional  system  of  checks  and
balances. But despite the president’s acquittal, Congress
had shown its power. For the brief months remaining
in his term, Johnson was largely irrelevant.

Election  of  1868  and  the  Fifteenth Amend ment
The  impeachment  controversy  made  Grant,  already
the  Union’s  greatest  war  hero,
a Republican idol as well. He eas-
ily  won  the  party’s  presidential
nomination in 1868. Although he
supported  Radical  Recon struc-
tion,  Grant  also  urged  sectional
reconciliation.  His  Democratic

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How and why did federal
Reconstruction policies
evolve between 1865
and 1870?

former  New  York  governor  Horatio
opponent,
Seymour, almost declined the nomination because he
understood  that  Democrats  could  not  yet  overcome
the stain of disloyalty. Grant won by an overwhelming
margin,  receiving  214  out  of  294  electoral  votes.
Republicans  retained  two-thirds  majorities  in  both
houses of Congress.

In February 1869, following this smashing victory,
Republicans  produced  the  era’s  last  constitutional
amendment,  the  Fifteenth.  It  protected  male  citizens’
right  to  vote  irrespective  of  race,  color,  or  “previous
condition  of  servitude.”  Despite  Radical  Republicans’
protests, the amendment left room for a poll tax (paid
for the privilege of voting) and literacy requirements.
Both were concessions to northern and western states
that  sought  such  provisions  to  keep  immigrants  and

