CHAPTER 15

  Reconstruction, 1865–1877

485

“We Accept the Situation”

This 1867 Harper’s Weekly cartoon
refers to the Military Reconstruction Act
of 1867, which instructed ex-Confederate
states to hold constitutional conventions
and stipulated that the resulting constitu-
tions must provide voting rights for black
men. The two images here suggest
white northerners’ views of both ex-
Confederates and emancipated slaves.
How is each depicted? What does this
suggest about the troubles that lay ahead
for Reconstruction policy? The cartoonist
was Thomas Nast (1840–1902), one of
the most influential artists of his era. Nast
first drew “Santa Claus” in his modern
form, and it was he who began depict-
ing the Democratic Party as a kicking
donkey and Republicans as an elephant —
suggesting (since elephants are supposed
to have good memories) their long remem-
brance of the Civil War and emancipation.
Library of Congress.

the “unworthy” poor from the polls. Congress required
the  four  states  remaining  under  federal  control  to
ratify  the  measure  as  a  condition  for  readmission
to the Union. A year later, the Fifteenth  Amendment
became law.

Passage  of  the  Fifteenth  Amendment,  despite  its
limitations, was an astonishing feat. Elsewhere in the
Western Hemisphere, lawmakers had left emancipated
slaves in a condition of semi-citizenship, with no vot-
ing rights. But, like almost all Americans, congressio-
nal Republicans had extraordinary faith in the power
of the vote. Many African Americans agreed. “The col-
ored people of these Southern states have cast their lot
with the Government,” declared a delegate to Arkansas’s
constitutional convention, “and with the great Repub-
lican Party. . . . The ballot is our only means of protec-
tion.” In the election of 1870, hundreds of thousands of
African Ameri cans voted across the South, in an atmo-
sphere of collective pride and celebration.

To see a longer excerpt of the Arkansas delegate’s
document, along with other primary sources from
this period, see Sources for America’s History.

Woman Suffrage Denied
Passage of the Fifteenth Amendment was a bittersweet
victory for one group of Union loyalists: women. Some
formerly  enslaved  women  believed  they  would  win
voting rights along with their men, until northern allies

corrected  that  impression.  National  women’s  rights
leaders, who had campaigned for the ballot since the
Seneca Falls convention of 1848, hoped to secure vot-
ing rights for women and African American men at the
same time. As Elizabeth Cady Stanton put it, women
could “avail ourselves of the strong arm and the blue
uniform of the black soldier to walk in by his side.” The
protected categories for voting in the Fifteenth Amend-
ment could have read “race, color, sex, or previous con-
dition of servitude.” But that word proved impossible
to obtain.

Enfranchising black men had clear benefits for the
authors of Reconstruction. It punished ex-Confederates
and  ensured  Republican  support  in  the  South.  But
women’s  partisan  loyalties  were  not  so  clear,  and  a
substantial  majority  of  northern  voters — all  men,  of
course — opposed  women’s  enfranchisement.  Even
Radicals feared that this “side issue” would overburden
their program. Influential abolitionists such as Wendell
Philips refused to campaign for women’s suffrage, fear-
ing  it  would  detract  from  the  focus  on  black  men.
Philips  criticized  women’s  leaders  for  being  “selfish.”
“Do  you  believe,”  Stanton  hotly  replied,  “the  African
race is entirely composed of males?”

By May 1869, the former allies were at an impasse.
At a convention of the Equal Rights Association, black
abolitionist  and  women’s  rights  advocate  Frederick
Douglass pleaded for white women to consider the sit-
uation in  the  South  and  allow  black  male  suffrage  to
take priority. “When women, because they are women,
are  hunted  down, . . . dragged  from  their  homes  and

