486

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

“Out in the Cold”

Though many women, including African American
activists in the South, went to the polls in the early
1870s to test whether the new Fourteenth Amend-
ment had given them the vote, federal courts
subsequently rejected women’s voting rights. Only
Wyoming and Utah territories fully enfranchised
women. At the same time, revised naturalization laws
allowed immigrant men of African descent — though
not of Asian descent — to become citizens. With its
crude Irish, African, and Chinese racial caricatures,
this 1884 cartoon from the humor magazine The
Judge echoes the arguments of some white suffragists:
though men of races stereotyped as inferior had been
enfranchised, white women were not. The woman
knocking on the door is also a caricature, with her
harsh appearance and masculine hat. Library of
Congress.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Abolitionists and women’s
suffrage advocates were
generally close allies
before 1865. What divi-
sions emerged during
Reconstruction and why?

hung upon lamp posts,” Douglass
said,  “then  they  will  have  an
urgency to obtain the ballot equal
to  our  own.”  Some  women’s  suf-
frage  leaders  joined  Douglass  in
backing the Fifteenth Amendment
without  the  word  sex.  But  many,
especially  white  women,  rejected
Douglass’s  plea.  One  African
American  woman  remarked  that  they  “all  go  for  sex,
letting  race  occupy  a  minor  position.”  Embittered,
Elizabeth Cady Stanton lashed out against “Patrick and
Sambo  and  Hans  and  Ung  Tung,”  maligning  unedu-
cated freedmen and immigrants who could vote while
educated  white  women  could  not.  Douglass’s  resolu-
tion in support of the Fifteenth Amendment failed, and
the convention broke up.

At this searing moment, a rift opened in the wom-
en’s movement. The majority, led by Lucy Stone, recon-
ciled  themselves  to  disappointment.  Organized  into
the  American  Woman  Suffrage  Association,  they
remained loyal to the Republican Party in hopes that
once  Reconstruction  had  been  settled,  it  would  be
women’s turn. A group led by Elizabeth Cady Stanton
and Susan B. Anthony struck out in a new direction.
They saw that, once the Reconstruction Amendments
had passed, women’s suffrage was unlikely in the near
future.  Stanton  declared  that  woman  “must  not  put
her  trust  in  man.”  The  new  organization  she  headed,

the  National  Woman  Suffrage  Association  (NWSA),
focused exclusively on women’s rights and took up the
battle for a federal suffrage amendment.

In 1873, NWSA members decided to test the new
constitutional  amendments.  Suffragists  all  over  the
United  States,  including  some  black  women  in  the
South,  tried  to  register  and  vote.  Most  were  turned
away. In an ensuing lawsuit, suffrage advocate Virginia
Minor of Missouri argued that the registrar who denied
her a ballot had violated her rights under the Fourteenth
Amendment.  In  Minor  v.  Happersett  (1875),  the
Supreme  Court  dashed  such hopes.  It  ruled  that  suf-
frage  rights  were  not  inherent  in  citizenship;  women
were citizens, but state legislatures could deny women
the vote if they wished.

Despite these defeats, Radical Reconstruction had
created the conditions for a nationwide women’s rights
movement.  Some  argued  for  suffrage  as  part  of  a
broader expansion of democracy. Others, on the con-
trary, saw white women’s votes as a possible counter-
weight  to  the  votes  of  African  American  or  Chinese
men  (while  opponents  pointed  out  that  black  and
immigrant women would likely be enfranchised, too).
When  Wyoming  Territory  gave  women  full  voting
rights in 1869, its governor received telegrams of con-
gratulation  from  around  the  world.  Afterward,  con-
trary  to  dire  predictions,  female  voters  in  Wyoming
did not appear to neglect their homes, abandon their
children,  or  otherwise  “unsex”  themselves.  Women’s

