CHAPTER 15

  Reconstruction, 1865–1877

487

suffrage  could  no  longer  be  dismissed  as  the  absurd
notion of a tiny minority. It had become a serious issue
for national debate.

The Meaning of Freedom
While political leaders wrangled in Washington, eman-
cipated slaves acted on their own ideas about freedom
(American Voices, p. 488). Emancipation meant many
things: the end of punishment by the lash; the ability to
move around; reunion of families; and opportunities to
build  schools  and  churches  and  to  publish  and  read
newspapers.  Foremost  among  freedpeople’s  demands
were  voting  rights  and  economic  autonomy.  Former
Confederates  opposed  these  goals.  Most  southern
whites  believed  the  proper  place  for  blacks  was  as
“servants and inferiors,” as a Virginia planter testified
to  Congress.  Mississippi’s  governor,  elected  under
President  Johnson’s  plan,  vowed  that  “ours  is  and  it
shall ever be, a government of white men.” Meanwhile,
as  Reconstruction  unfolded,  it  became  clear  that  on
economic  questions,  southern  blacks  and  northern
Republican policymakers did not see eye to eye.

The Quest for Land
During the Civil War, wherever Union forces had con-
quered portions of the South, rural black workers had
formed  associations  that  agreed  on  common  goals
and  even  practiced  military  drills.  After  the  war,
when  resettlement  became  the  responsibility  of  the
Freedmen’s  Bureau,  thousands  of  rural  blacks  hoped
for  land  distributions.  But  Johnson’s  amnesty  plan,
which  allowed  pardoned  Confederates  to  recover
property seized during the war, blasted such hopes. In
October 1865, for example, Johnson ordered General
Oliver O. Howard, head of the Freedmen’s Bureau, to
restore plantations on South Carolina’s Sea Islands to
white property holders. Dispossessed blacks protested:
“Why do you take away our lands? You take them from
us  who  have  always  been  true,  always  true  to  the
Government! You give them to our all-time enemies!
That is not right!” Former slaves resisted efforts to evict
them. Led by black Union veterans, they fought pitched
battles  with  former  slaveholders  and  bands  of  ex-
Confederate  soldiers.  But  white  landowners,  some-
times aided by federal troops, generally prevailed.

Freed Slaves and Northerners: Conflicting Goals
On questions of land and labor, freedmen in the South
and Republicans in Washington seriously differed. The

economic  revolution  of  the  antebellum  period  had
transformed New England and the Mid-Atlantic states.
Believing similar development could revolutionize the
South,  most  congressional  leaders  sought  to  restore
cotton as the country’s leading export, and they envi-
sioned  former  slaves  as  wageworkers  on  cash-crop
plantations, not independent farmers. Only a handful
of  radicals,  like  Thaddeus  Stevens,  argued  that  freed
slaves had earned a right to land grants, through what
Lincoln had referred to as “four hundred years of unre-
quited  toil.”  Stevens  proposed  that  southern  planta-
tions be treated as “forfeited estates of the enemy” and
broken up into small farms for former slaves. “Nothing
will  make  men  so  industrious  and  moral,”  Stevens
declared, “as to let them feel that they are above want
and are the owners of the soil which they till.”

Today,  most  historians  of  Reconstruction  agree
with  Stevens:  policymakers  did  not  do  enough  to
ensure freedpeople’s economic security. Without land,
former  slaves  were  left  poor  and  vulnerable.  At  the
time, though, Stevens had few allies. A deep veneration
for private property lay at the heart of his vision, but
others interpreted the same principle differently: they
defined ownership by legal title, not by labor invested.
Though often accused of harshness toward the defeated
Confederacy,  most  Republicans — even  Radicals —
could not imagine “giving” land to former slaves. The
same congressmen, of course, had no difficulty giving
away homesteads on the frontier that had been taken
from Indians. But they were deeply reluctant to confis-
cate white-owned plantations.

Some southern Republican state governments did
try, without much success, to use tax policy to break up
large  landholdings  and  get  them  into  the  hands  of
poorer  whites  and  blacks.  In  1869,  South  Carolina
established  a  land  commission  to  buy  property  and
resell  it  on  easy  terms  to  the  landless;  about  14,000
black  families  acquired  farms  through  the  program.
But  such  initiatives  were  the  exception,  not  the  rule.
Over  time,  some  rural  blacks  did  succeed  in  becom-
ing small-scale landowners, especially in Upper South
states such as Virginia, North Carolina, and Tennessee.
But it was an uphill fight, and policymakers provided
little aid.

Wage  Labor  and  Sharecropping  Without  land,
most  freedpeople  had  few  options  but  to  work  for
former slave owners. Landowners wanted to retain the
old gang-labor system, with wages replacing the food,
clothing,  and  shelter  that  slaves  had  once  received.
Southern  planters — who  had  recently  scorned  the
North for the cruelties of wage labor — now embraced

