A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Freedom

Slavery  meant  one  thing  to  slave  masters,  something  altogether  different  to
those enslaved. Emancipation exposed these radically different points of view.

Henry William Ravenel
Diary, March 8, 1865

Edward Barnell Heyward
Letter, January 22, 1866

Ravenel,  from  a  (formerly)  wealthy  plantation  family  in
South  Carolina,  wrote  amid  the  Confederacy’s  collapse
and the aftermath of defeat.

In this letter to a friend in the North, the son of a South
Carolina plantation owner made grim predictions for the
future.

The breath of Emancipation has passed over the country,
& we are now in that transition state between the new
& the old systems — a state of chaos & disorder. Will the
negro be materially benefitted by the change? Will the
condition of the country in its productive resources, in
material prosperity be improved? Will it be a benefit to
the landed proprietors? These are questions which will
have their solution in the future. They are in the hands
of that Providence which over-ruleth all things for good.
It was a strong conviction of my best judgment that the
old relation of master & slave, had received the divine
sanction & was the best condition in which the two races
could live together for mutual benefit. There were many
defects to be corrected & many abuses to be remedied.
Among these defects I will enumerate the want of legisla-
tion to make the marriage contract binding — to prevent
the separation of families, & to restrain the cupidity of
cruel masters. Perhaps it is for neglecting these obliga-
tions that God has seen fit to dissolve that relation. I
believe the negro must remain in this country & that
his condition although a freed-man, must be to labour
on the soil. Nothing but necessity will compel him to
labour. Now the question is, will that necessity be so
strong as to compel him to labour, which will be profit-
able to the landed proprietors. Will he make as much
cotton, sugar, rice & tobacco for the world as he did
previously? They will now have a choice where to labour.
This will ensure good treatment & the best terms. The
most humane, the most energetic & the most judicious
managers have the best chances in the race for success.
I expect to see a revolution in the ownership of landed
estates. Those only can succeed who bring the best
capacity for the business. Time will show.

Source: The Civil War and Reconstruction: A Documentary Collection, ed. William E.
Gienapp (New York: W. W. Norton, 2001), 304–305.

My dear Jim
Your letter of date July 1865, has just reached me and you
will be relieved by my answers, to find that I am still alive,
and extremely glad to hear from you. . . . I have served in
the Army, my brother died in the Army, and every family
has lost members. No one can know how reduced we are,
particularly the refined & educated. . . .

My father had five plantations on the coast, and all the

buildings were burnt, and the negroes, now left to them-
selves, are roaming in a starvation condition . . . like lost
sheep, with no one to care for them.

They find the Yankee only a speculator, and they
have no confidence in anyone. They very naturally, poor
things, think that freedom means doing nothing, and this
they are determined to do. They look to the government,
to take care of them, and it will be many years, before this
once productive country will be able to support itself. The
former kind and just treatment of the slaves, and their
docile and generous temper, make them now disposed
to be [quiet] and obedient: but the determination of your
Northern people to give them a place in the councils of
the Country and make them the equal of the white man,
will at last, bear its fruit, and we may then expect them,
to rise against the whites, and in the end, be exterminated
themselves.

I am now interested in a school for the negroes, who
are around me, and will endeavor to do my duty, to them,
as ever before, but I am afraid their best days are past. . . .
I feel now that I have no country, I obey like a subject,

but I cannot love such a government. Perhaps the next
letter, you get from me, will be from England. . . .

Source: Stanley I. Kutler, ed., Looking for America: The People’s History, 2nd ed., 2 vols.
(New York: W. W. Norton, 1979), 2: 4–6.

488

