490

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

Sharecroppers in Georgia

This photograph shows a Georgia sharecropping family in front of their cabin at cotton-harvesting time.
The man in the buggy behind them is probably the landowner. What does this photograph reveal about the
condition of sharecroppers? Is there evidence that they might have considered themselves to be doing fairly
well — as well as evidence of limits on their success and independence? Note that cotton is growing all the
way up to the house, suggesting that the family left little room for a garden or livestock. Through the relent-
less pressure of loans and debt, sharecropping forced southern farmers into a cash-crop monoculture. Brown
Brothers.

wage  work  with  apparent  satisfaction.  Maliciously
comparing  black  workers  to  free-roaming  pigs,  land-
owners told them to “root, hog, or die.” Former slaves
found  themselves  with  rock-bottom  wages;  it  was  a
shock  to  find  that  emancipation  and  “free  labor”  did
not prevent a hardworking family from nearly starving.
African American workers used a variety of tactics
to fight back. As early as 1865, alarmed whites across
the  South  reported  that  former  slaves  were  holding
mass meetings to agree on “plans and terms for labor.”
Such meetings continued through the Reconstruction
years. Facing limited prospects at home, some workers
left the fields and traveled long distances to seek better-
paying jobs on the railroads or in turpentine and lum-
ber  camps.  Others — from  rice  cultivators  to  laundry
workers — organized strikes.

At the same time, struggles raged between employ-
ers  and  freedpeople  over  women’s  work.  In  slavery,
African American women’s bodies had been the sexual
property of white men. Protecting black women from
such abuse, as much as possible, was a crucial priority
for  freedpeople.  When  planters  demanded  that  black
women  go  back  into  the  fields,  African  Americans
resisted  resolutely.  “I  seen  on  some  plantations,”  one
freedman recounted, “where the white men would . . .
tell  colored  men  that  their  wives  and  children  could
not live on their places unless they work in the fields.
The  colored  men  [answered  that]  whenever  they
wanted  their  wives  to  work  they  would  tell  them
themselves.”

There was a profound irony in this man’s definition
of freedom: it designated a wife’s labor as her husband’s

