CHAPTER 15

  Reconstruction, 1865–1877

491

property. Some black women asserted their indepen-
dence and headed their own households, though this
was often a matter of necessity rather than choice. For
many freedpeople, the opportunity for a stable family
life was one of the greatest achievements of emancipa-
tion. Many enthusiastically accepted the northern ideal
of  domesticity.  Missionaries,  teachers,  and  editors  of
black  newspapers  urged  men  to  work  diligently  and
support their families, and they told women (though
many worked for wages) to devote themselves to moth-
erhood and the home.

Even in rural areas, former slaves refused to work
under conditions that recalled slavery. There would be
no gang work, they vowed: no overseers, no whippings,
no regulation of their private lives. Across the South,
planters who needed labor were forced to yield to what
one  planter  termed  the  “prejudices  of  the  freedmen,

who desire to be masters of their own time.” In a few
areas, wage work became the norm — for example, on
the  giant  sugar  plantations  of  Louisiana  financed  by
northern capital. But cotton planters lacked money to
pay  wages,  and  sometimes,  in  lieu  of  a  wage,  they
offered  a  share  of  the  crop.  Freedmen,  in  turn,  paid
their rent in shares of the harvest.

Thus  the  Reconstruction  years  gave  rise  to  a  dis-
tinctive system of cotton agriculture known as share-
cropping,  in  which  freedmen  worked  as  renters,
exchanging  their  labor  for  the  use  of  land,  house,
implements, and sometimes seed and fertilizer. Share-
croppers typically turned over half of their crops to the
landlord  (Map  15.2).  In  a  credit-starved  agricultural
region that grew crops for a world economy, sharecrop-
ping  was  an  effective  strategy,  enabling  laborers  and
landowners to share risks and returns. But it was a very

1860

Master’s house
Service and farm buildings
Slave quarters
Road
Valley floor
Gentle slopes
Higher ground

Wright’s Branc

h

Branch  Creek

Gin
house

The boundary line
of the plantation is
the same on both
maps because the
Barrow Plantation
remained in the
same family.

North Fork Li

t
t
l
e
R
i
v
e
r

k
r
o

yll’s     F

S

1. Syrup     4%
2. Wheat    5%
3. Fodder   6%
4. Corn    28%
5. Cotton 57%

12 3

5

4

Crop share of
income for
Handy Barrow
(ex-slave, 1881)

1881

Landlord’s house
Service and farm buildings
Houses of former slaves
Road
Valley floor
Gentle slopes
Higher ground

The boundary also
indicates that the
land was surveyed
according to the old
“metes-and-bounds”
system, not the
rectangular pattern
created by the Land
Ordinance of 1785
for the division of
federal lands.

Black Church
(Baptist)

School
(cid:11) (cid:12)

Branch

Creek

Wright’s Branc

h

Gin
house

Handy
Barrow

North Fork Li

t
t
l
e
R
i
v
e
r

k
r
o

yll’s     F

S

 Plantation   boundary

 Plantation   boundary

MAP 15.2
The Barrow Plantation, 1860 and 1881
This map is a modern redrawing of one that first appeared in the popular magazine Scribner’s
Monthly in April 1881, accompanying an article about the Barrow plantation. Comparing the 1860
map of this central Georgia plantation with the 1881 map reveals the impact of sharecropping on
patterns of black residence. In 1860, the slave quarters were clustered near the planter’s house. In
contrast, by 1881 the sharecroppers were scattered across the plantation’s 2,000 acres, having built
cabins on the ridges between the low-lying streams. The surname Barrow was common among the
sharecropping families, which means almost certainly that they had been slaves who, years after
emancipation, still had not moved on. For sharecroppers, freedom meant not only their individual
lots and cabins but also the school and church shown on the map.

