492

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

unequal  relationship.  Starting  out  penniless,  share-
croppers had no way to make it through the first grow-
ing season without borrowing for food and supplies.

Country  storekeepers  stepped  in.  Bankrolled  by
northern suppliers, they furnished sharecroppers with
provisions  and  took  as  collateral  a  lien  on  the  crop,
effectively  assuming  ownership  of  croppers’  shares
and leaving them only what remained after debts had
been paid. Crop-lien laws enforced lenders’ ownership
rights to the crop share. Once indebted at a store, share-
croppers  became  easy  targets  for  exorbitant  prices,
unfair interest rates, and crooked bookkeeping. As cot-
ton prices declined in the 1870s, more and more share-
croppers fell into permanent debt. If the merchant was
also the landowner or conspired with the landowner,
debt became a pretext for forced labor, or peonage.

Sharecropping arose in part because it was a good
fit  for  cotton  agriculture.  Cotton,  unlike  sugarcane,
could be raised efficiently by small farmers (provided
they had the lash of indebtedness
always on their backs). We can see
this  in  the  experience  of  other
regions  that  became  major  pro-
ducers  in  response  to  the  global
cotton shortage set off by the Civil

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Why did sharecropping
emerge, and how did it
affect freedpeople and the
southern economy?

War. In India, Egypt, Brazil, and West Africa, variants
of  the  sharecropping  system  emerged.  Everywhere
international merchants and bankers, who put up cap-
ital, insisted on passage of crop-lien laws. Indian and
Egyptian villagers ended up, like their American coun-
terparts, permanently under the thumb of furnishing
merchants.

By  1890,  three  out  of  every  four  black  farmers  in
the South were tenants or sharecroppers; among white
farmers,  the  ratio  was  one  in  three.  For  freedmen,
sharecropping  was  not  the  worst  choice,  in  a  world
where former masters threatened to impose labor con-
ditions  that  were  close  to  slavery.  But  the  costs  were
devastating. With farms leased on a year-to-year basis,
neither  tenant  nor  owner  had  much  incentive  to
improve  the  property.  The  crop-lien  system  rested
on  expensive  interest  payments — money  that  might
other wise have gone into agricultural improvements or
to meet human needs. And sharecropping committed
the South inflexibly to cotton, a crop that generated the
cash required by landlords and furnishing merchants.
The result was a stagnant farm economy that blighted
the South’s future. As Republican governments tried to
remake the region, they confronted not only wartime
destruction but also the failure of their hopes that free

Cotton Farmers, Marietta,
Georgia, c. 1880

Before the Civil War, the South
had proudly called itself the
“Cotton Kingdom.” After the
war, cotton was still king, but
few southerners got rich on cot-
ton profits. Instead, thousands
of small-scale farmers, white and
black, struggled with plunging
crop prices, debt, and taxes on
land to support an array of
ambitious Reconstruction pro-
grams. The farmers here have
baled their cotton for market
and pose with their wagons in
Marietta’s courthouse square.
Courtesy Georgia Vanishing Archives
Collection, cob262.

