CHAPTER 15

  Reconstruction, 1865–1877

493

labor would create a modern, prosperous South, built
in the image of the industrializing North. Instead, the
South’s rural economy remained mired in widespread
poverty and based on an uneasy compromise between
landowners and laborers.

Republican Governments in the South
Between  1868  and  1871,  all  the  former  Confederate
states met congressional stipulations and rejoined the
Union. Protected by federal troops, Republican admin-
istrations  in  these  states  retained  power  for  periods
ranging from a few months in Virginia to nine years in
South Carolina, Louisiana, and Florida. These govern-
ments remain some of the most misunderstood insti-
tutions  in  all  U.S.  history.  Ex-Confederates  never
accepted  their  legitimacy.  Many  other  whites  agreed,
focusing particularly on the role of African Americans
who  began  to  serve  in  public  office.  “It  is  strange,
abnormal,  and  unfit,”  declared  one  British  visitor  to
Louisiana, “that a negro Legislature should deal . . . with
the gravest commercial and financial interests.” During
much of the twentieth century, historians echoed such
critics,  condemning  Reconstruction  leaders  as  igno-
rant  and  corrupt.  These  historians  shared  the  racial
prejudices of the British observer: Blacks were simply
unfit to govern.

In  fact,  Reconstruction  governments  were  ambi-
tious.  They  were  hated,  in  part,  because  they  under-
took  impressive  reforms  in  public  education,  family
law, social services, commerce, and transportation. Like
their  northern  allies,  southern  Republicans  admired
the  economic  and  social  transformations  that  had
occurred in the North before the Civil War and worked
energetically to import them.

The  southern  Republican  Party  included  former
Whigs,  a  few  former  Democrats,  black  and  white
newcomers  from  the  North,  and  southern  African
Americans.  From  the  start,  its  leaders  faced  the
dilemma  of  racial  prejudice.  In  the  upcountry,  white
Unionists were eager to join the party but sometimes
reluctant to work with black allies. In most areas, the
Republicans  also  desperately  needed  African  Ameri-
cans, who constituted a majority of registered voters in
Alabama, Florida, South Carolina, and Mississippi.

For  a  brief  moment  in  the  late  1860s,  black  and
white  Republicans  joined  forces  through  the  Union
League,  a  secret  fraternal  order.  Formed  in  border
states  and  northern  cities  during  the  Civil  War,  the
league  became  a  powerful  political  association  that
spread through the former Confederacy. Functioning
as  a  grassroots  wing  of  Radical  Republicanism,  it

pressured  Congress  to  uphold  justice  for  freedmen.
After  blacks  won  voting  rights,  the  league  organized
meetings  at  churches  and  schoolhouses  to  instruct
freedmen  on  political  issues  and  voting  procedures.
League clubs held parades and military drills, giving a
public face to the new political order.

The  Freedmen’s  Bureau  also  supported  grassroots
Reconstruction  efforts.  Though  some  bureau  officials
sympathized with planters, most were dedicated, ideal-
istic  men  who  tried  valiantly  to  reconcile  opposing
interests. Bureau men kept a sharp eye out for unfair
labor contracts and often forced landowners to bargain
with workers and tenants. They advised freedmen on
economic  matters;  provided  direct  payments  to  des-
perate  families,  especially  women  and  children;  and
helped establish schools. In cooperation with northern
aid societies, the bureau played a key role in founding
African  American  colleges  and  universities  such  as
Fisk, Tougaloo, and the Hampton Institute. These insti-
tutions, in turn, focused on training teachers. By 1869,
there were more than three thousand teachers instruct-
ing  freedpeople  in  the  South.  More  than  half  were
themselves African Americans.
Ex-Confederates  viewed

the  Union  League,
Freedmen’s  Bureau,  and  Republican  Party  as  illegiti-
mate forces in southern affairs, and they resented the
political  education  of  freedpeople.  They  referred  to
southern  whites  who  supported  Reconstruction  as
scalawags — an ancient Scots-Irish term for worthless
animals — and denounced northern whites as  carpet-
baggers, self-seeking interlopers who carried all their
property  in  cheap  suitcases  called  carpetbags.  Such
labels glossed over the actual diversity of white Repub-
licans. Many arrivals from the North, while motivated
by  personal  profit,  also  brought  capital  and  skills.
Interspersed with ambitious schemers were reformers
hoping  to  advance  freedmen’s  rights.  So-called  scala-
wags were even more varied. Some southern Republi-
cans were former slave owners; others were ex-Whigs
or even ex-Democrats who hoped to attract northern
capital.  But  most  hailed  from  the  backcountry  and
wanted to rid the South of its slaveholding aristocracy,
believing  slavery  had  victimized  whites  as  well  as
blacks.

Southern  Democrats’  contempt  for  black  politi-
cians, whom they regarded as ignorant field hands, was
just  as  misguided  as  their  stereotypes  about  white
Republicans.  Many  African  American  leaders  in  the
South came from the ranks of antebellum free blacks.
Others  were  skilled  men  like  Robert  Smalls  of  South
Carolina, who as a slave had worked for wages that he
turned  over  to  his  master.  Smalls,  a  steamer  pilot  in

