494

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

other papers, and in that way I found out a great deal,
and I told them whatever I thought was right.” Though
never  proportionate  to  their  numbers  in  the  popula-
tion,  blacks  became  officeholders  across  the  South.
In  South  Carolina,  African  Americans  constituted  a
majority in the lower house of the legislature in 1868.
Over  the  course  of  Reconstruction,  twenty  African
Americans served in state administrations as governor,
lieutenant governor, secretary of state, or lesser offices.
More  than  six  hundred  became  state  legislators,  and
sixteen were congressmen.

Both  white  and  black  Republicans  had  big  plans.
Their  southern  Reconstruction  governments  elimi-
nated  property  qualifications  for  the  vote  and  abol-
ished  Black  Codes.  Their  new  state  constitutions
expanded the rights of married women, enabling them
to own their own property and wages — “a wonderful
reform,” one white woman in Georgia wrote, for “the
cause  of  Women’s  Rights.”  Like  their  counterparts  in
the North, southern Republicans also believed in using
government  to  foster  economic  growth.  Seeking  to
diversify the economy beyond cotton agriculture, they
poured money into railroads and other projects.

In  myriad  ways,  Republicans  brought  southern
state and city governments up to date. They outlawed
corporal punishments such as whipping and branding.
They  established  hospitals  and  asylums  for  orphans
and  the  disabled.  South  Carolina  offered  free  public
health services, while Alabama provided free legal rep-
resentation  for  defendants  who  could  not  pay.  Some
municipal  governments  paved  streets  and  installed
streetlights. Petersburg, Virginia, established a board of
health that offered free medical care during the small-
pox  epidemic  of  1873.  Nashville,  Tennessee,  created
soup kitchens for the poor.

Most impressive of all were achievements in public
education,  where  the  South  had  lagged  woefully.
Republicans viewed education as the foundation of a
true democratic order. By 1875, over half of black chil-
dren were attending school in Mississippi, Florida, and
South Carolina. African Americans of all ages rushed
to the newly established schools, even when they had
to pay tuition. They understood why slaveholders had
criminalized  slave  literacy:  the  practice  of  freedom
rested  on  the  ability  to  read  newspapers,  labor  con-
tracts,  history  books,  and  the  Bible.  A  school  official
in  Virginia  reported  that  freedpeople  were  “crazy  to
learn.” One Louisiana man explained why he was send-
ing his children to school, even though he needed their
help  in  the  field.  It  was  “better  than  leaving  them  a
fortune;  because  if  you  left  them  even  five  hundred
dollars,  some  man  having  more  education  than  they
had  would  come  along  and  cheat  them  out  of  it  all.”

Hiram R. Revels

In 1870, Hiram Rhoades Revels (1827–1901) was elected to
the U.S. Senate from Mississippi to fill Jefferson Davis’s former
seat. Revels was a free black from North Carolina who had
moved to the North and attended Knox College in Illinois.
During the Civil War he had recruited African Americans for
the Union army and, as an ordained Methodist minister,
served as chaplain of a black regiment in Mississippi, where
he settled after the war. The Granger Collection, New York.

Charleston  harbor,  had  become  a  war  hero  when  he
escaped with his family and other slaves and brought
his ship to the Union navy. Buying property in Beaufort
after the war, Smalls became a state legislator and later
a  congressman.  Blanche  K.  Bruce,  another  former
slave, had been tutored on a Virginia plantation by his
white  father;  during  the  war,  he  escaped  and  estab-
lished a school for freedmen in Missouri. In 1869, he
moved  to  Mississippi  and  became,  five  years  later,
Mississippi’s second black U.S. senator. Political leaders
such  as  Smalls  and  Bruce  were  joined  by  northern
blacks — including ministers, teachers, and Union vet-
erans — who moved south to support Reconstruction.
During Radical Reconstruc tion, such men fanned
out into plantation districts and recruited former slaves
to participate in politics. Literacy
helped freedman Thomas Allen, a
Baptist  minister  and  shoemaker,
win election to the Georgia legis-
lature. “The colored people came
to me,” Allen recalled, “and I gave
them the best instructions I could.
I took the New York Tribune and

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What policies did southern
Reconstruction legislators
pursue, and what needs of
the postwar South did they
seek to serve?

