Thousands of white children, particularly girls and the
sons of poor farmers and laborers, also benefitted from
new  public  education  systems.  Young  white  women’s
graduation  from  high  school,  an  unheard-of  occur-
rence before the Civil War, became a celebrated event
in southern cities and towns.

Southern  Reconstruction  governments  also  had
their flaws — flaws that would become more apparent
as the 1870s unfolded. In the race for economic devel-
opment,  for  example,  state  officials  allowed  private
companies to hire out prisoners to labor in mines and
other industries, in a notorious system known as con-
vict  leasing. Corruption was rife and conditions hor-
rific. In 1866, Alabama’s governor leased 200 state con-
victs to a railroad construction company for the grand
total of $5. While they labored to build state-subsidized
lines such as the Alabama and Chattanooga, prisoners
were  housed  at  night  in  open,  rolling  cages.  Physical
abuse was common and medical care nonexistent. At
the start of 1869, Alabama counted 263 prisoners avail-
able for leasing; by the end of the year, a staggering 92
of them had died. While convict leasing expanded in
later  decades,  it  began  during  Reconstruction,  sup-
ported by both Republicans and Democrats.

Building Black Communities
In slavery days, African Americans had built networks
of religious worship and mutual aid, but these operated
largely in secret. After emancipation, southern blacks
could  engage  in  open  community  building.  In  doing
so,  they  cooperated  with  northern  missionaries  and
teachers, both black and white, who came to help in the

CHAPTER 15

  Reconstruction, 1865–1877

495

great work of freedom. “Ignorant
though  they  may  be,  on  account
of  long  years  of  oppression,  they
exhibit  a  desire  to  hear  and  to
learn,  that  I  never  imagined,”
reported African American min-
ister Reverend James Lynch, who
traveled  from  Maryland  to  the
Deep South. “Every word you say
while preaching, they drink down
and respond to, with an earnestness that sets your heart
all on fire.”

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
Compare the results of
African Americans’ com-
munity building with their
struggles to obtain better
working conditions. What
links do you see between
these efforts?

Independent  churches  quickly  became  central
community institutions, as blacks across the South left
white-dominated congregations, where they had sat in
segregated balconies, and built churches of their own.
These churches joined their counterparts in the North
to  become  national  denominations,  including,  most
prominently, the National Baptist Convention and the
African  Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  Black  churches
served not only as sites of worship but also as schools,
social centers, and meeting halls. Ministers were often
political  spokesmen  as  well.  As  Charles  H.  Pearce,  a
black Methodist pastor in Florida, declared, “A man in
this State cannot do his whole duty as a minister except
he  looks  out  for  the  political  interests  of  his  people.”
Religious  leaders  articulated  the  special  destiny  of
freedpeople as the new “Children of Israel.”

The  flowering  of  black  churches,  schools,  news-
papers,  and  civic  groups  was  one  of  the  most  endur-
ing  initiatives  of  the  Reconstruction  era.  Dedicated
teachers and charity leaders embarked on a project of
“race  uplift”  that  never  ceased  thereafter,  while  black

Freedmen’s School,
Petersburg, Virginia, 1870s

A Union veteran, returning to
Virginia in the 1870s to photo-
graph battlefields, captured this
image of an African American
teacher and her students at a
freedmen’s school. Note the dif-
ficult conditions in which they
study: many are barefoot, and
there are gaps in the walls and
floor of the school building.
Nonetheless, the students have
a few books. Despite poverty
and relentless hostility from
many whites, freedpeople across
the South were determined to
get a basic education for them-
selves and their children. William L.
Clements Library, University of
Michigan.

