496

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

Fisk Jubilee Singers, 1873

Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee, was established in 1865 to provide higher education for African
Americans from all across the South. When university funds ran short in 1871, the Jubilee Singers choral
group was formed and began touring to raise money for the school. They performed African American
spirituals and folksongs, such as “Swing Low, Sweet Chariot,” arranged in ways that appealed to white
audiences, making this music nationally popular for the first time. In 1872, the group performed for Presi-
dent Grant at the White House. Money raised by this acclaimed chorale saved Fisk from bankruptcy. Edmund
Havel’s portrait of the group was painted during their first European tour. Fisk University Art Galleries.

entrepreneurs  were  proud  to  build  businesses  that
served  their  communities.  The  issue  of  desegrega-
tion — sharing  public  facilities  with  whites — was  a
trickier  one.  Though  some  black  leaders  pressed  for
desegregation, they were keenly aware of the backlash
this  was  likely  to  provoke.  Others  made  it  clear  that
they preferred their children to attend all-black schools,
especially if they encountered hostile or condescend-
ing  white  teachers  and  classmates.  Many  had  prag-
matic  concerns.  Asked  whether  she  wanted  her  boys
to  attend  an  integrated  school,  one  woman  in  New
Orleans  said  no:  “I  don’t  want  my  children  to  be
pounded by . . . white boys. I don’t send them to school
to fight, I send them to learn.”

At  the  national  level,  congressmen  wrestled  with
similar issues as they debated an ambitious civil rights
bill  championed  by  Radical  Republican  senator
Charles  Sumner.  Sumner  first  introduced  his  bill  in
1870,  seeking  to  enforce,  among  other  things,  equal

access  to  schools,  public  transportation,  hotels,  and
churches. Despite a series of defeats and delays, the bill
remained  on  Capitol  Hill  for  five  years.  Opponents
charged that shared public spaces would lead to race
mixing and intermarriage. Some sympathetic Repub-
licans  feared  a  backlash,  while  others  questioned
whether, because of the First Amendment, the federal
government  had  the  right  to  regulate  churches.  On
his  deathbed  in  1874,  Sumner  exhorted  a  visitor  to
remember the civil rights bill: “Don’t let it fail.” In the
end, the Senate removed Sumner’s provision for inte-
grated  churches,  and  the  House  removed  the  clause
requiring  integrated  schools.  But  to  honor  the  great
Massachusetts abolitionist, Congress passed the  Civil
Rights Act of 1875. The law required “full and equal”
access to jury service and to transportation and public
accommodations,  irrespective  of  race.  It  was  the  last
such act for almost a hundred years — until the Civil
Rights Act of 1964.

