CHAPTER 15

  Reconstruction, 1865–1877

497

The Undoing of
Reconstruction
Sumner’s  death  marked  the  waning  of  Radical
Reconstruction.  That  movement  had  accomplished
more than anyone dreamed a few years earlier. But a
chasm  had  opened  between  the  goals  of  freedmen,
who wanted autonomy, and policymakers, whose first
priorities  were  to  reincorporate  ex-Confederates  into
the  nation  and  build  a  powerful  national  economy.
Meanwhile,  the  North  was  flooded  with  one-sided,
racist reports such as James M. Pike’s influential book
The  Prostrate  State  (1873),  which  claimed  South
Carolina was in the grip of “black barbarism.” Events of
the 1870s deepened the northern public’s disillusion-
ment. Scandals rocked the Grant administration, and
an  economic  depression  curbed  both  private  invest-
ment and public spending. At the same time, northern
resolve was worn down by continued ex-Confederate
resistance and violence. Only full-scale military inter-
vention could reverse the situation in the South, and by
the mid-1870s the North had no political willpower to
renew the occupation.

The Republicans Unravel
Republicans  had  banked  on  economic  growth  to
underpin  their  ambitious  program,  but  their  hopes
were dashed in 1873 by the sudden onset of a severe
worldwide depression. In the United States, the initial
panic was triggered by the bankruptcy of the Northern
Pacific Railroad, backed by leading financier Jay Cooke.
Cooke’s supervision of Union finances during the Civil
War had made him a national hero; his downfall was a
shock,  and  since  Cooke  was  so  well  connected  in
Washington, it raised suspicions that Republican finan-
cial manipulation had caused the depression. Officials
in  the  Grant  administration  deepened  public  resent-
ment  toward  their  party  when  they  rejected  pleas  to
increase the money supply and provide relief from debt
and unemployment.

The  impact  of  the  depression  varied  in  different
parts of the United States. Farmers suffered a terrible
plight as crop prices plunged, while industrial workers
faced  layoffs  and  sharp  wage  reductions.  Within  a
year, 50 percent of American iron manufacturing had
stopped. By 1877, half the nation’s railroad companies
had  filed  for  bankruptcy.  Rail  construction  halted.
With  hundreds  of  thousands  thrown  out  of  work,
people  took  to  the  road.  Wandering  “tramps,”  who
camped  by  railroad  tracks  and  knocked  on  doors

to  beg  for  work  and  food,  terrified  prosperous
Americans.

In addition to discrediting Republicans, the depres-
sion directly undercut their policies, most dramatically
in the South. The ex-Confederacy was still recovering
from  the  ravages  of  war,  and  its  new  economic  and
social  order  remained  fragile.  The  bold  policies  of
southern  Republicans — for  education,  public  health,
and  grants  to  railroad  builders — cost  a  great  deal  of
money.  Federal  support,  through  programs  like  the
Freedmen’s  Bureau,  had  begun  to  fade  even  before
1873. Republicans had banked on major infusions of
northern and foreign investment capital; for the most
part,  these  failed  to  materialize.  Investors  who  had
sunk  money  into  Confederate  bonds,  only  to  have
those  repudiated,  were  especially  wary.  The  South’s
economy  grew  more  slowly  than  Republicans  had
hoped, and after 1873, growth screeched to a halt. State
debts  mounted  rapidly,  and  as  crushing  interest  on
bonds fell due, public credit collapsed.

Not only had Republican officials failed to antici-
pate  a  severe  depression;  during  the  era  of  generous
spending, considerable funds had also been wasted or
had ended up in the pockets of corrupt officials. Two
swindlers  in  North  Carolina,  one  of  them  a  former
Union  general,  were  found  to  have  distributed  more
than $200,000 in bribes and loans to legislators to gain
millions in state funds for rail construction. Instead of
building  railroads,  they  used  the  money  to  travel  to
Europe  and  speculate  in  stocks  and  bonds.  Not  only
Republicans  were  on  the  take.  “You  are  mistaken,”
wrote one southern Democrat to a northern friend, “if
you  suppose  that  all  the  evils . . . result  from  the  car-
petbaggers  and  negroes.  The  Democrats  are  leagued
with them when anything is proposed that promises to
pay.” In South Carolina, when African American con-
gressman  Robert  Smalls  was  convicted  of  taking  a
bribe,  the  Democratic  governor  pardoned  him — in
exchange for an agreement that federal officials would
drop an investigation of Democratic election frauds.

One of the depression’s most tragic results was the
failure of the Freedman’s Savings and Trust Company.
This private bank, founded in 1865, had worked closely
with the Freedmen’s Bureau and Union army across the
South.  Former  slaves  associated  it  with  the  party  of
Lincoln, and thousands responded to northerners’ call
for thrift and savings by bringing their small deposits
to  the  nearest  branch.  African  American  farmers,
entrepreneurs, churches, and charitable groups opened
accounts at the bank. But in the early 1870s, the bank’s
directors sank their money into risky loans and specu-
lative investments. In June 1874, the bank failed.

