498

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

Some Republicans believed that, because the bank
had been so closely associated with the U.S. Army and
federal agencies, Congress had a duty to step in. Even
one  southern  Democrat  argued  that  the  government
was  “morally  bound  to  see  to  it  that  not  a  dollar  is
lost.” But in the end, Congress refused to compensate
the  61,000  depositors.  About  half  recovered  small
amounts — averaging $18.51 — but the others received
nothing.  The  party  of  Reconstruction  was  losing  its
moral gloss.

The Disillusioned Liberals  As a result of the depres-
sion  and  rising  criticism  of  postwar  activist  govern-
ment, a revolt emerged in the Republican Party. It was
led  by  influential  intellectuals,  journalists,  and  busi-
nessmen who believed in classical liberalism: free trade,
small government, low property taxes, and limitation
of  voting  rights  to  men  of  education  and  property.
Liberals responded to the massive increase in federal
power,  during  the  Civil  War  and  Reconstruction,  by
urging a policy of laissez  faire, in which government
“let alone” business and the economy. In the postwar
decades,  laissez  faire  advocates  never  succeeded  in
ending federal policies such as the protective tariff and
national banking system (Chapter 16), but their argu-
ments  helped  roll  back  Reconstruction.  Unable  to
block Grant’s renomination for the presidency in 1872,
the  dissidents  broke  away  and  formed  a  new  party
under  the  name  Liberal  Republican.  Their  candidate
was  Horace  Greeley,  longtime  publisher  of  the  New
York  Tribune  and  veteran  reformer  and  abolitionist.
The  Democrats,  still  in  disarray,  also  nominated
Greeley, notwithstanding his editorial diatribes against
them.  A  poor  campaigner,  Greeley  was  assailed  so
severely that, as he said, “I hardly knew whether I was
running for the Presidency or the penitentiary.”

Grant  won  reelection  overwhelmingly,  capturing
56  percent  of  the  popular  vote  and  every  electoral
vote. Yet Liberal Republicans had shifted the terms of
debate.  The  agenda  they  advanced — smaller  govern-
ment, restricted voting rights, and reconciliation with
ex-Confederates — resonated with Democrats, who had
long advocated limited government and were working
to  reclaim  their  status  as  a  legitimate  national  party.
Liberalism  thus  crossed  party  lines,  uniting  disillu-
sioned  conservative  Republi cans
with  Democrats  who  denounced
government activism. E. L. Godkin
of The Nation and other classical
liberal  editors  played  key  roles
in turning northern public opin-
ion against Reconstruction. With

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
How did ex-Confederates,
freedpeople, Republicans,
and classical liberals view
the end of Reconstruction?

unabashed  elitism,  Godkin  and  others  claimed  that
freedmen were unfit to vote. They denounced universal
suffrage,  which  “can  only  mean  in  plain  English  the
government of ignorance and vice.”

The  second  Grant  administration  gave  liberals
plenty  of  ammunition.  The  most  notorious  scandal
involved Crédit Mobilier, a sham corporation set up by
shareholders  in  the  Union  Pacific  Railroad  to  secure
government grants at an enormous profit. Organizers
of the scheme protected it from investigation by pro-
viding  gifts  of  Crédit  Mobilier  stock  to  powerful
members  of  Congress.  Another  scandal  involved  the
Whiskey Ring, a network of liquor distillers and trea-
sury agents who defrauded the government of millions
of  dollars  of  excise  taxes  on  whiskey.  The  ringleader
was Grant’s private secretary, Orville Babcock. Others
went to prison, but Grant stood by Babcock, possibly
perjuring  himself  to  save  his  secretary  from  jail.  The
stench of scandal permeated the White House.

Counterrevolution in the South
While northerners became preoccupied with scandals
and the shock of economic depression, ex-Confederates
seized  power  in  the  South.  Most  believed  (as  north-
ern  liberals  had  also  begun  to  argue)  that  southern
Reconstruction governments were illegitimate “regimes.”
Led by the planters, ex-Confederates staged a massive
insurgency to take back the South.

When  they  could  win  at  the  ballot  box,  southern
Democrats  took  that  route.  They  got  ex-Confederate
voting rights restored and campaigned against “negro
rule.” But when force was necessary, southern Demo-
crats used it. Present-day Americans, witnessing polit-
ical violence in other countries, seldom remember that
our own history includes the overthrow of elected gov-
ernments  by  paramilitary  groups.  But  this  is  exactly
how Reconstruction ended in many parts of the South.
Ex-Confederates terrorized Republicans, especially in
districts with large proportions of black voters. Black
political  leaders  were  shot,  hanged,  beaten  to  death,
and  in  one  case  even  beheaded.  Many  Republicans,
both black and white, went into hiding or fled for their
lives.  Southern  Democrats  called  this  violent  process
“Redemption” — a  heroic  name  that  still  sticks  today,
even though this seizure of power was murderous and
undemocratic.

No  one  looms  larger  in  this  bloody  story  than
Nathan  Bedford  Forrest,  a  decorated  Confederate
general. Born in poverty in 1821, Forrest had risen to
become a big-time slave trader and Mississippi planter.
A  fiery  secessionist,  Forrest  had  formed  a  Tennessee

