CHAPTER 15

  Reconstruction, 1865–1877

499

Confederate  cavalry  regiment,  fought  bravely  at  the
battle of Shiloh, and won fame as a daring raider. On
April  12,  1864,  his  troops  perpetrated  one  of  the
war’s  worst  atrocities,  the  massacre  at  Fort  Pillow,
Tennessee, of black Union soldiers who were trying to
surrender.

After  the  Civil  War,  Forrest’s  determination  to
uphold white supremacy altered the course of Recon-
struction. William G. Brownlow, elected as Tennessee’s
Republican  governor  in  1865,  was  a  tough  man,  a
former prisoner of the Confederates who was not shy
about calling his enemies to account. Ex-Confederates
struck back with a campaign of terror, targeting espe-
cially Brownlow’s black supporters. Amid the mayhem,
ex-Confederates formed the first  Ku  Klux  Klan group
in late 1865 or early 1866. As it proliferated across the
state, the Klan turned to Forrest, who had been trying,
unsuccessfully,  to  rebuild  his  prewar  fortune.  Late  in
1866, at a secret meeting in Nashville, Forrest donned
the  robes  of  Grand  Wizard.  His  activities  are  mostly
cloaked in mystery, but there is no mistake about his
goals: the Klan would strike blows against the despised
Republican government of Tennessee.

In many towns, the Klan became virtually identical
to  the  Democratic  Party.  Klan  members — including
Forrest — dominated  Tennessee’s  delegation  to  the
Democratic national convention of 1868. At home, the
Klan unleashed a murderous campaign of terror, and
though  Governor  Brownlow  responded  resolutely,  in
the  end  Republicans  cracked.  The  Klan  and  similar
groups — organized  under  such  names  as  the  White
League and Knights of the White Camelia — arose in
other states. Vigilantes burned freedmen’s schools, beat
teachers,  attacked  Republican  gatherings,  and  mur-
dered  political  opponents.  By  1870,  Democrats  had
seized power in Georgia and North Carolina and were
making  headway  across  the  South.  Once  they  took
power,  they  slashed  property  taxes  and  passed  other
laws favorable to landowners. They terminated Recon-
struction programs and cut funding for schools, espe-
cially those teaching black students.

In responding to the Klan between 1869 and 1871,
the  federal  government  showed  it  could  still  exert
power effectively in the South. Determined to end Klan
violence, Congress held extensive hearings and in 1870
passed  laws  designed  to  protect  freedmen’s  rights
under  the  Fourteenth  and  Fifteenth  Amendments.
These so-called Enforcement Laws authorized federal
prosecutions, military intervention, and martial law to
suppress terrorist activity. Grant’s administration made
full use of these new powers. In South Carolina, where
the Klan was deeply entrenched, U.S. troops occupied

Ku Klux Klan Mask

White supremacists of the 1870s organized under many
names and wore many costumes, not simply (or often) the
white cone-shaped hats that were made famous later, in the
1920s, when the Klan underwent a nationwide resurgence.
Few masks from the 1870s have survived. The horns and
fangs on this one, from North Carolina, suggest how Klan
members sought to strike terror in their victims, while also
hiding their own identities. North Carolina Museum of History.

nine counties, made hundreds of arrests, and drove as
many as 2,000 Klansmen from the state.

This assault on the Klan, while raising the spirits of
southern  Republicans,  revealed  how  dependent  they
were on Washington. “No such law could be enforced
by state authority,” one Mississippi Republican observed,
“the local power being too weak.” But northern Repub-
licans were growing disillusioned with Reconstruction,
while  in  the  South,  prosecuting  Klansmen  was  an
uphill battle against all-white juries and unsympathetic
federal  judges.  After  1872,  prosecutions  dropped  off.
In  the  meantime,  the  Texas  government  fell  to  the
Democrats in 1873 and Alabama and Arkansas in 1874.

Reconstruction Rolled Back
As divided Republicans debated how to respond, vot-
ers in the congressional election of 1874 handed them
one of the most stunning defeats of the nineteenth cen-
tury.  Responding  especially  to  the  severe  depression
that  gripped  the  nation,  they  removed  almost  half of
the party’s 199 representatives in the House. Democrats,
who  had  held  88  seats,  now  commanded  an  over-
whelming majority of 182. “The election is not merely

