500

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

a victory but a revolution,” exulted a Democratic news-
paper in New York.

After 1874, with Democrats in control of the House,
Republicans who tried to shore up their southern wing
had  limited  options.  Bowing  to  election  results,  the
Grant administration began to reject southern Repub-
licans’ appeals for aid. Events in Mississippi showed the
outcome. As state elections neared there in 1875, para-
military groups such as the Red Shirts operated openly.
Mississippi’s  Republican  governor,  Adelbert  Ames,  a
Union veteran from Maine, appealed for U.S. troops,
but Grant refused. “The whole public are tired out with
these annual autumnal outbreaks in the South,” com-
plained a Grant official, who told southern Republicans
that  they  were  responsible  for  their  own  fate.  Facing
a  rising  tide  of  brutal  murders,  Governor  Ames —
realizing  that  only  further  bloodshed  could  result —
urged his allies to give up the fight. Brandishing guns
and  stuffing  ballot  boxes,  Democratic  “Redeemers”
swept the 1875 elections and took control of Mississippi.
By 1876, Reconstruction was largely over. Republican
governments,  backed  by  token  U.S.  military  units,
remained  in  only  three  southern  states:  Louisiana,
South Carolina, and Florida. Elsewhere, former Con-
fed erates and their allies took power.

The Supreme Court Rejects Equal Rights  Though
ex-Confederates seized power in southern states, new
landmark constitutional amendments and federal laws
remained in force. If the Supreme Court had left these
intact, subsequent generations of civil rights advocates
could have used the federal courts to combat racial dis-
crimination and violence. Instead, the Court closed off
this avenue for the pursuit of justice, just as it dashed
the hopes of women’s rights advocates.

As  early  as  1873,  in  a  group  of  decisions  known
collectively  as  the  Slaughter-House  Cases,  the  Court
began to undercut the power of the Fourteenth Amend-
ment. In this case and a related ruling, U.S. v. Cruikshank
(1876), the justices argued that the Fourteenth Amend-
ment offered only a  few, rather trivial federal protec-
tions  to  citizens  (such  as  access  to  navigable  water-
ways).  In  Cruikshank — a  case  that  emerged  from  a
gruesome  killing  of  African  American  farmers  by
ex-Confederates  in  Colfax,  Louisiana,  followed  by  a
Demo cratic political coup — the Court ruled that vot-
ing rights remained a state matter unless the state itself
violated those rights. If former slaves’ rights were vio-
lated  by  individuals  or  private  groups  (including  the
Klan),  that  lay  beyond  federal  jurisdiction.  The
Fourteenth Amendment did not protect citizens from
armed  vigilantes,  even  when  those  vigilantes  seized

political power. The Court thus gutted the Fourteenth
Amendment. In the Civil Rights Cases (1883), the jus-
tices  also  struck  down  the  Civil  Rights  Act  of  1875,
paving the way for later decisions that sanctioned seg-
regation.  The  impact  of  these  decisions  endured  well
into the twentieth century.

The Political Crisis of 1877  After the grim election
results of 1874, Republicans faced a major battle in the
presidential election of 1876. Abandoning Grant, they
nominated Rutherford B. Hayes, a former Union gen-
eral  who  was  untainted  by  corruption  and — even
more  important — hailed  from  the  key  swing  state  of
Ohio.  Hayes’s  Democratic  opponent  was  New  York
governor Samuel J. Tilden, a Wall Street lawyer with a
reform  reputation.  Tilden  favored  home  rule  for  the
South, but so, more discreetly, did Hayes. With enforce-
ment  on  the  wane,  Reconstruction  did  not  figure
prominently in the campaign, and little was said about
the  states  still  led  by  Reconstruction  governments:
Florida, South Carolina, and Louisiana.

Once  returns  started  coming  in  on  election  night,
however,  those  states  loomed  large.  Tilden  led  in  the
popular vote and seemed headed for victory until sleep-
less politicians at Republican headquarters realized that
the electoral vote stood at 184 to 165, with the 20 votes
from Florida, South Carolina, and Louisiana still uncer-
tain. If Hayes took those votes, he would win by a mar-
gin  of  1.  Citing  ample  evidence  of  Democratic  fraud
and intimidation, Republican officials certified all three
states for Hayes. “Redeemer” Democrats who had taken
over the states’ governments submitted their own elec-
toral votes for Tilden. When Congress met in early 1877,
it confronted two sets of electoral votes from those states.
The Constitution does not provide for such a con-
tingency. All it says is that the president of the Senate
(in 1877, a Republican) opens the electoral certificates
before  the  House  (Democratic)  and  the  Senate
(Republican)  and  “the  Votes  shall  then  be  counted”
(Article  2,  Section  1).  Suspense  gripped  the  country.
There was talk of inside deals or a new election — even
a violent coup. Finally, Congress appointed an electoral
commission  to  settle  the  question.  The  commission
included seven Republicans, seven Democrats, and, as
the deciding member, David Davis, a Supreme Court
justice not known to have fixed party loyalties. Davis,
however, disqualified himself by accepting an Illinois
Senate  seat.  He  was  replaced  by  Republican  justice
Joseph P. Bradley, and by a vote of 8 to 7, on party lines,
the commission awarded the election to Hayes.

In the House of Representatives, outraged Demo-
crats vowed to stall the final count of electoral votes so

