CHAPTER 15

  Reconstruction, 1865–1877

501

“Grantism”

President Grant was lampooned on both
sides of the Atlantic for the problems of
his scandal-ridden administration. The
British magazine Puck shows Grant barely
defying gravity to keep himself and his
corrupt subordinates aloft and out of jail.
To a great extent, however, the hero of the
Union army remained personally popular
at home and abroad. The British public
welcomed Grant with admiration on his
triumphant foreign tour in 1877. Library
of Congress.

as to prevent Hayes’s inauguration on March 4. But in
the end, they went along — partly because Tilden him-
self urged that they do so. Hayes had publicly indicated
his desire to offer substantial patronage to the South,
including  federal  funds  for  education  and  internal
improvements.  He  promised  “a  complete  change  of
men  and  policy” — naively  hoping,  at  the  same  time,
that he could count on support from old-line southern
Whigs and protect black voting rights. Hayes was inau-
gurated on schedule. He expressed hope in his inaugu-
ral  address  that  the  federal  government  could  serve
“the interests of both races carefully and equally.” But,

setting aside the U.S. troops who were serving on bor-
der duty in Texas, only 3,000 Union soldiers remained
in  the  South.  As  soon  as  the  new  president  ordered
them back to their barracks, the last Republican admin-
istrations in the South collapsed. Reconstruction had
ended.

Lasting Legacies
In the short run, the political events of 1877 had little
impact  on  most  southerners.  Much  of  the  work  of
“Redemption” had already been done. What mattered

