T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

The South’s “Lost

Cause”

After Reconstruction ended, many white southerners celebrated the Confeder-
acy as a heroic “Lost Cause.” Through organizations such as the Sons of Confed-
erate Veterans and United Daughters of the Confederacy, they profoundly influ-
enced the nation’s memories of slavery, the Civil War, and Reconstruction.

1.  Commemorative postcard of living Confederate flag, Robert E. Lee Monument, Richmond, Virginia, 1907.

An estimated 150,000 people gathered in 1890 to dedicate this statue — ten times more than had attended
earlier memorial events.

Source: The Library of Virginia.

2.  From the United Daughters of the Confederacy
Constitution, 1894. The United Daughters of the
Confederacy (UDC), founded in 1894, grew in three
years to 136 chapters and by the late 1910s
counted a membership of 100,000.

The objects of this association are historical, educational,
memorial, benevolent, and social: To fulfill the duties
of sacred charity to the survivors of the war and those
dependent on them; to collect and preserve material
for a truthful history of the war; to protect historic
places of the Confederacy; to record the part taken
by the Southern women . . . in patient endurance of
hardship and patriotic devotion during the struggle;
to perpetuate the memory of our Confederate heroes

and the glorious cause for which they fought; to cherish
the ties of friendship among members of this Association;
to endeavor to have used in all Southern schools only
such histories as are just and true.

3.  McNeel Marble Co. advertisement in Confederate

Veteran magazine, 1905.

To the Daughters of the Confederacy: In regard to that
Confederate monument which your Chapter has been
talking about and planning for since you first got orga-
nized. Why not buy it NOW and have it erected before
all the old veterans have answered the final roll call? Why
wait and worry about raising funds? Our terms to U.D.C.
Chapters are so liberal and our plans for raising funds

502

