are so effective as to obviate the necessity of either waiting
or worrying. During the last three or four years we have
sold Confederate monuments to thirty-seven of your
sister Chapters. . . . Our designs, our prices, our work,
our business methods have pleased them, and we can
please you. What your sister Chapters have done, you
can do. . . . WRITE TO-DAY.

4.  Confederate veteran’s letter, Confederate Veteran
magazine, 1910. An anonymous Georgian who
had served in Lee’s army sent the following letter
to the veterans’ magazine after attending a
reunion in Memphis.

Reunion gatherings are supposed to be for the benefit of
the old veterans; but will you show us where the privates,
the men who stood the hardships and did the fighting, have
any consideration when they get to the city that is expected
to entertain them? . . . [In Memphis, I] stopped at the
school building, where there were at least twenty-five or
thirty old veterans lying on the ground, and had been there
all night. All this while the officers were being banqueted,
wined, dined, and quartered in the very best hotels; but the
private must shift for himself, stand around on the street,
or sit on the curbstone. He must march if he is able, but the
officers ride in fine carriages. Pay more attention to the
men of the ranks — men who did service! I always go
prepared to pay my way; but I do not like to be ignored.

5.  Matthew Page Andrews, The Women of the South
in War Times, 1923. Matthew Page Andrews’s The
Women of the South in War Times, approved by
the UDC, was a popular textbook for decades in
schools throughout the South.

The Southern people of the “old regime” have been pic-
tured as engaged primarily in a protracted struggle for
the maintenance of negro slavery. . . . Fighting on behalf
of slavery was as far from the minds of these Americans
as going to war in order to free the slaves was from the
purpose of Abraham Lincoln, whose sole object, fre-
quently expressed by him, was to “preserve the Union.” . . .

That, in the midst of war, there were almost no
instances of arson, murder, or outrage committed by the

negroes of the South is an everlasting tribute to the splen-
did character of the dominant race and their moral uplift
of a weaker one. . . . When these negroes were landed
on American shores, almost all were savages taken from
the lowest forms of jungle life. It was largely the women
of the South who trained these heathen people, molded
their characters, and, in the second and third generations,
lifted them up a thousand years in the scale of civilization.

6.  Susie King Taylor, Reminiscences of My Life in

Camp with the 33d United States Colored Troops,
Late 1st S.C. Volunteers, 1902. Susie King Taylor,
born in slavery in Georgia in 1848, fled with her
uncle during the Civil War and served as a nurse
in the Union army.

I read an article, which said the ex-Confederate Daughters
had sent a petition to the managers of the local theatres
in Tennessee to prohibit the performance of “Uncle Tom’s
Cabin,” claiming it was exaggerated (that is, the treatment
of the slaves), and would have a very bad effect on the
children who might see the drama. I paused and thought
back a few years of the heart-rending scenes I have wit-
nessed. . . . I remember, as if it were yesterday, seeing
droves of negroes going to be sold, and I often went to
look at them, and I could hear the auctioneer very plainly
from my house, auctioning these poor people off.

Do these Confederate Daughters ever send petitions

to prohibit the atrocious lynchings and wholesale mur-
dering and torture of the negro? Do you ever hear of
them fearing this would have a bad effect on the chil-
dren? Which of these two, the drama or the present
state of affairs, makes a degrading impression upon
the minds of our young generation? In my opinion it
is not “Uncle Tom’s Cabin.” . . . It does not seem as if
our land is yet civilized.

Sources: (2) Minutes of the Seventh Annual Meeting of the United Daughters of
the Confederacy (Nashville, TN.: Press of Foster & Webb, Printers, 1901), 235;
(3) Confederate Veteran, 1905; (4) Confederate Veteran, Vol. XVIII (Nashville, TN.:
S. A. Cunningham, 1910); (5) Matthew Page Andrews, ed., The Women of the South in
War Times (Baltimore: The Norman, Remington Co., 1923), 3–4, 9–10; (6) Susie King
Taylor, Reminiscences of My Life in Camp (Boston: Published by the author, 1902),
65–66.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE
1.  What do sources 2 and 3 tell us about the work of local UDC
chapters? What does the advertisement suggest about the
economy of the postwar South?

2.  What can you infer from these sources about the situation
in the South after the Civil War? Why might women have
played a particularly important role in memorial associa-
tions?

3.  Compare and contrast sources 4 and 6. Who did “Lost

Cause” associations serve, and how is this connected to
issues of class and race?

4.  How does source 5 depict slaves? Slaveholders? Is this an

accurate account of the history of the South, and how does
this compare to source 4? What do these different interpre-
tations suggest about the legacy of “Redemption”?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
“Lost Cause” advocates often stated that their work was not
political. To what extent was this true, based on the evidence
here? What do these documents suggest about the influence
of the Lost Cause, and also the limitations and challenges it
faced? What do they tell us about the legacies of Reconstruc-
tion more broadly?

503

