504

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

was the long, slow decline of Radical Republican power
and the corresponding rise of Democrats in the South
and nationally. It was obvious that so-called Redeemers
in  the  South  had  assumed  power  through  violence.
But many Americans — including prominent classical
liberals  who  shaped  public  opinion — believed  the
Democrats had overthrown corrupt, illegitimate gov-
ernments; thus the end justified the means. After 1874,
those  who  deplored  the  results  had  little  political
traction.  The  only  remaining  question  was  how  far
Reconstruction would be rolled back.

The South never went back to the antebellum status
quo. Sharecropping, for all its flaws and injustices, was
not  slavery.  Freedmen  and  freedwomen  managed  to
resist gang labor and work on their own terms. They
also  established  their  right  to  marry,  read  and  write,
worship as they pleased, and travel in search of a better
life — rights  that  were  not  easily  revoked.  Across  the
South, black farmers overcame great odds to buy and
work their own land. African American businessmen
built thriving enterprises. Black churches and commu-
nity groups sustained networks of mutual aid. Parents
sacrificed  to  send  their children  to  school,  and  a  few
proudly  watched  their  sons  and  daughters  graduate
from college.

Reconstruction had also shaken, if not fully over-
turned,  the  legal  and  political  framework  that  had
made the United States a white man’s country. This was
a stunning achievement, and though hostile courts and
political opponents undercut it, no one ever repealed
the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments.
They remained in the Constitution, and the civil rights
movement of the twentieth century would return and
build on this framework (Chapter 26).

Still, in the final reckoning, Reconstruction failed.
The majority of freedpeople remained in poverty, and
by the late 1870s their political rights were also erod-
ing.  Vocal  advocates  of  smaller  government  argued
that Reconstruction had been a mistake; pressured by
economic hardship,  northern  voters  abandoned  their
southern Unionist allies. One of the enduring legacies
of  this  process  was  the  way  later  Americans  remem-
bered Reconstruction itself. After “Redemption,” gen-
erations  of  schoolchildren  were  taught  that  ignorant,
lazy  blacks  and  corrupt  whites  had  imposed  illegiti-
mate  Reconstruction  “regimes”  on  the  South.  White
southerners won national support for their celebration
of  a  heroic  Confederacy  (Thinking  Like  a  Historian,
p. 502).

One of the first historians to challenge these views
was  the  great  African  American  intellectual  W.  E.  B.
Du  Bois.  In  Black  Reconstruction  in  America  (1935),

Du  Bois  meticulously  documented  the  history  of
African  American  struggle,  white  vigilante  violence,
and national policy failure. If Reconstruction, he wrote,
“had been conceived as a major national program . . .
whose accomplishment at any price was well worth the
effort, we should be living today in a different world.”
His words still ring true, but in 1935 historians ignored
him. Not a single scholarly journal reviewed Du Bois’s
important  book.  Ex-Confederates  had  lost  the  war,
but  they  won  control  over  the  nation’s  memory  of
Reconstruction.

Meanwhile,  though  their  programs  failed  in  the
South, Republicans carried their nation-building proj-
ect into the West, where their policies helped consoli-
date a continental empire. There, the federal power that
had  secured  emancipation  created  the  conditions  for
the United States to become an industrial power and a
major leader on the world stage.

SUMMARY
Postwar Republicans faced two tasks: restoring rebel-
lious states to the Union and defining the role of eman-
cipated slaves. After Lincoln’s assassination, his succes-
sor, Andrew Johnson, hostile to Congress, unilaterally
offered the South easy terms for reentering the Union.
Exploiting  this  opportunity,  southerners  adopted
oppressive Black Codes and put ex-Confederates back
in  power.  Congress  impeached  Johnson  and,  though
failing to convict him, seized the initiative and placed
the South under military rule. In this second, or radi-
cal, phase of Reconstruction, Republican state govern-
ments  tried  to  transform  the  South’s  economic  and
social  institutions.  Congress  passed  innovative  civil
rights  acts  and  funded  new  agencies  like  the  Freed-
men’s  Bureau.  The  Fourteenth  Amendment  defined
U.S. citizenship and asserted that states could no longer
supersede it, and the Fifteenth Amendment gave vot-
ing rights to formerly enslaved men. Debate over this
amendment precipitated a split among women’s rights
advocates, since women did not win inclusion.

Freedmen  found  that  their  goals  conflicted  with
those of Republican leaders, who counted on cotton to
fuel  economic  growth.  Like  southern  landowners,
national lawmakers envisioned former slaves as wage-
workers,  while  freedmen  wanted  their  own  land.
Sharecropping,  which  satisfied  no  one  completely,
emerged  as  a  compromise  suited  to  the  needs  of  the
cotton  market  and  an  impoverished,  credit-starved
region.

