CHAPTER 15

  CHAPTER REVIEW

505

Nothing could reconcile ex-Confederates to Repub-
lican  government,  and  they  staged  a violent  counter-
revolution  in  the  name  of  white  supremacy  and
“Redemption.”  Meanwhile,  struck  by  a  massive  eco-
nomic depression, northern voters handed Republicans
a  crushing  defeat  in  the  election  of  1874.  By  1876,
Reconstruction was dead. Rutherford B. Hayes’s narrow

victory in the presidential election of that year resulted
in withdrawal of the last Union troops from the South.
A series of Supreme Court decisions also undermined
the  Fourteenth  Amendment  and  civil  rights  laws,
setting  up  legal  parameters  through  which,  over  the
long term, disenfranchisement and segregation would
flourish.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key People

Andrew Johnson (p. 480)
Charles Sumner (p. 481)
Thaddeus Stevens (p. 482)
Ulysses S. Grant (p. 483)
Elizabeth Cady Stanton (p. 486)
Robert Smalls (p. 493)
Blanche K. Bruce (p. 494)
Nathan Bedford Forrest (p. 498)

Key Concepts and Events

Ten Percent Plan (p. 480)
Wade-Davis Bill (p. 480)
Black Codes (p. 481)
Freedmen’s Bureau (p. 481)
Civil Rights Act of 1866 (p. 481)
Fourteenth Amendment (p. 481)
Reconstruction Act of 1867

(p. 482)

Fifteenth Amendment (p. 485)
American Woman Suffrage

Association (p. 486)

National Woman Suffrage

Association (p. 486)

Minor v. Happersett (p. 486)
sharecropping (p. 491)
Union League (p. 493)

scalawags (p. 493)
carpetbaggers (p. 493)
convict leasing (p. 495)
Civil Rights Act of 1875 (p. 496)
Freedman’s Savings and Trust

Company (p. 497)

classical liberalism (p. 498)
laissez faire (p. 498)
Crédit Mobilier (p. 498)
“Redemption” (p. 498)
Ku Klux Klan (p. 499)
Enforcement Laws (p. 499)
Slaughter-House Cases (p. 500)
U.S. v. Cruikshank (p. 500)
Civil Rights Cases (p. 500)

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  How did U.S. presidents and Congress seek to rein-
tegrate the Confederacy into the Union? What dif-
ferent approaches did they take, and what were the
results?

2.  Compare the goals of Radical Republicans, freed-
people,  and  ex-Confederates  during  Recon struc-
tion.  What  conflicts  ensued  from  their  differing
agendas?

3.  Why did Reconstruction falter? To what extent was
its  failure  the  result  of  events  in  the  South,  the
North, and Washington, D.C.?

4.  Some  of  the  language  historians  use  to  describe
Reconstruction still reflects the point of view of ex-
Confederates,  who  spoke  of  “Redemption.”  What
other names might we use for that process? What
difference (if any) would it make if scholars called it
something else?

