506

PART 5

  CHAPTER REVIEW

5.  THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING  Look again at
the  events  listed  under  “Politics  and  Power”  and
“Identity”  on  the  thematic  timeline  on  page  409.
Some historians have argued that, during this era,
the  United  States  moved,  politically  and  socially,

from being a loose union of states to being a more
unified and inclusive nation. To what extent do you
agree? Use the events of Reconstruction as evidence
in making your case.

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS TIME AND PLACE  Ex-Confederates
were  not  the  first  Americans  to  engage  in  violent
protest against what they saw as tyrannical govern-
ment power. Imagine, for example, a conversation
between a participant in Shays’s Rebellion (Chap-
ter 6) and a southern Democrat who participated
in the overthrow of a Republican government in his
state.  How  would  each  describe  his  grievances?
Who  would  he  name  as  enemies?  Compare  and
contrast the tactics of these and other violent pro-
tests  against  government  power  in  the  United
States. To what extent did these groups succeed?

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  Return  to  the  image  at
the start of this chapter (p. 479), which shows a cel-
ebration  in  Baltimore  after  ratification  of  the  Fif-
teenth Amendment. Note the distinguished African

American heroes depicted at the top and the three
scenes  at  the  bottom.  In  the  complete  version  of
this  popular  lithograph,  additional  images  appear
on the left and right: black Union soldiers in battle;
an  African  American  minister  preaching  at  an
independent  black  church;  a  teacher  and  her  stu-
dents in a freedpeople’s school; an African Ameri-
can  farmer  in  a  wheat  field;  and  a  drawing  of  a
proud black family on their farm with the caption
“We till our own fields.” If a freedperson and a for-
mer slave owner had seen this image in 1870, how
might  each  have  responded?  Imagine  that  an
African American family had placed the picture in
their home in 1870. How might they have reflected
differently, twenty years later, on its significance?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

American Social History Project, Freedom’s Unfinished
Revolution (1996). A wonderful collection of images
and eyewitness accounts.

Philip Dray, Capitol Men (2008). A readable history of
Reconstruction from the perspective of the first
African American congressmen.

Faye E. Dudden, Fighting Chance: The Struggle over
Woman Suffrage and Black Suffrage in Reconstruction
America (2011). A thoughtful exploration of the split
among radical reformers.

Eric Foner, A Short History of Reconstruction (1990).
The best short overview of events in this decade,
combining grassroots and political perspectives.

Steven Hahn, A Nation Under Our Feet (2003). Hahn’s
groundbreaking study of the rural South shows how
African Americans’ strategies during Reconstruction
were built on earlier experiences during slavery and
the Civil War.

Brooks D. Simpson, The Reconstruction Presidents
(1998). A lively assessment of presidential politics
from Lincoln through Hayes, full of entertaining
quotations.

