Conquering a Continent
1854–1890

On  May  10,  1869,  Americans

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
How  did  U.S.  policymakers  seek  to
stimulate  the  economy  and  inte-
grate the trans-Mississippi west into
the  nation,  and  how  did  this  affect
people living there?

poured into the streets for a giant
party. In big cities, the racket was
incredible.  Cannons  boomed  and  train
whistles shrilled. New York ﬁred a hundred-
gun salute at City Hall. Congregations sang
anthems, while the less religious gathered
in saloons to celebrate with whiskey. Philadelphia’s joyful throngs reminded an observer
of the day, four years earlier, when news had arrived of Lee’s surrender. The festivities
were prompted by a long-awaited telegraph message: executives of the Union Paciﬁc
and Central Paciﬁc railroads had driven a golden spike at Promontory Point, Utah, link-
ing  up  their  lines.  Unbroken  track  now  stretched  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Paciﬁc.  A
journey across North America could be made in less than a week.

The ﬁrst transcontinental railroad meant jobs and money. San Francisco residents
got right to business: after ﬁring a salute, they loaded Japanese tea on a train bound for
St.  Louis,  marking  California’s  ﬁrst  overland  delivery  to  the  East.  In  coming  decades,
trade  and  tourism  fueled  tremendous  growth  west  of  the  Mississippi.  San  Francisco,
which in 1860 had handled $7.4 million in imports, increased that ﬁgure to $49 million
over thirty years. The new railroad would, as one speaker predicted in 1869, “populate
our vast territory” and make America “the highway of nations.”

The railroad was also a political triumph. Victorious in the Civil War, Republicans saw
themselves  as  heirs  to  the  American  System  envisioned  by  antebellum  Whigs.  They
believed government intervention in the economy was the key to nation building. But
unlike Whigs, whose plans had met stiff Democratic opposition, Republicans enjoyed a
decade of unparalleled federal power. They used it vigorously: U.S. government spend-
ing per person, after skyrocketing in the Civil War, remained well above earlier levels.
Republicans believed that national economic integration was the best guarantor of last-
ing peace. As a New York minister declared, the federally supported transcontinental
railroad would “preserve the Union.”

The  minister  was  wrong  on  one  point.  He  claimed  the  railroad  was  a  peaceful
achievement, in contrast to military battles that had brought “devastation, misery, and
woe.” In fact, creating a continental empire caused plenty of woe. Regions west of the
Mississippi could only be incorporated if the United States subdued native peoples and
established  favorable  conditions  for  international  investors — often  at  great  domestic
cost. And while conquering the West helped make the United States into an industrial
power, it also deepened America’s rivalry with European empires and created new pat-
terns of exploitation.

16

C H A P T E R

THE REPUBLICAN VISION
The New Union and the World

Integrating the National

Economy

INCORPORATING THE
WEST

Mining Empires

Cattlemen on the Plains

Homesteaders

The First National Park

A HARVEST OF BLOOD:
NATIVE PEOPLES
DISPOSSESSED

The Civil War and Indians on the

Plains

Grant’s Peace Policy

The End of Armed Resistance

Strategies of Survival

Western Myths and Realities

508

