510

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

The Republican Vision
Reshaping  the  former  Confederacy  was  only  part  of
Republicans’  plan  for  a  reconstructed  nation.  They
remembered  the  era  after  Andrew  Jackson’s  destruc-
tion of the Second National Bank as one of economic
chaos, when the United States had become vulnerable
to  international  creditors  and  market  fluctuations.
Land speculation on the frontier had provoked extreme
cycles of boom and bust. Failure to fund a transconti-
nental railroad had left different regions of the country
disconnected. This, Republicans believed, had helped
trigger the Civil War, and they were determined to set
a new direction.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
In what ways did Repub-
licans use federal power
on the world stage, and
in what ways did they
continue policies from the
pre–Civil War era?

Even while the war raged, Congress made vigorous
use of federal power, launching the transcontinental rail
project and a new national banking system. Congress
also raised the protective tariff on
a  range  of  manufactured  goods,
from textiles to steel, and on some
agricultural  products,  like  wool
and  sugar.  At  federal  custom-
houses in each port, foreign man-
ufacturers who brought merchan-
dise  into  the  United  States  had
to  pay  import  fees.  These  tariff
revenues  gave  U.S.  manufactur-
ers, who did not pay the fees, a competitive advantage
in America’s vast domestic market.

The  economic  depression  that  began  in  1873  set
limits  on  Republicans’  economic  ambitions,  just  as  it
hindered their Reconstruction plans in the South. But
their policies continued to shape the economy. Though
some historians argue that the late nineteenth century
was  an  era  of  laissez  faire  or  unrestrained  capitalism,
in  which  government  sat  passively  by,  the  industrial
United  States  was  actually  the  product  of  a  massive
public-private partnership in which government played
critical roles.

The New Union and the World
The  United  States  emerged  from  the  Civil  War  with
new  leverage  in  its  negotiation  with  European  coun-
tries, especially Great Britain, whose navy dominated
the seas. Britain, which had allowed Confederate raid-
ing ships such as CSS Alabama to be built in its ship-
yards, submitted afterward to arbitration and paid the
United  States  $15.5  million  in  damages.  Flush  with
victory,  many  Americans  expected  more  British  and
Spanish territories to drop into the Union’s lap. Senator

Charles  Sumner  proposed,  in  fact,  that  Britain  settle
the Alabama claims by handing over Canada.

Such dreams were a logical extension of pre–Civil
War  conquests,  especially  in  the  Mexican  War.  With
the coasts now linked by rail, merchants and manufac-
turers looked across the Pacific, hungry for trade with
Asia.  Americans  had  already  established  a  dominant
presence in Hawaii, where U.S. whalers and merchant
ships stopped for food and repairs. With the advent of
steam-powered vessels, both the U.S. Navy and private
shippers wanted more refueling points in the Caribbean
and Pacific.

Even before the Civil War, these commercial aims
had  prompted  the  U.S.  government  to  force  Japan  to
open trade. For centuries, since unpleasant encounters
with Portuguese traders in the 1600s, Japanese leaders
had adhered to a policy of strict isolation. Americans,
who  wanted  coal  stations  in  Japan,  argued  that  trade
would extend what one missionary called “commerce,
knowledge,  and  Christianity,  with  their  multiplied
blessings.”  Whether  or  not  Japan  wanted  these  bless-
ings  was  irrelevant.  In  1854,  Commodore  Matthew
Perry succeeded in getting Japanese officials to sign the
Treaty  of  Kanagawa,  allowing  U.S.  ships  to  refuel  at
two  ports.  By  1858,  America  and  Japan  had  com-
menced trade, and a U.S. consul took up residence in
Japan’s capital, Edo (now known as Tokyo).

Union victory also increased U.S. economic influ-
ence  in  Latin  America.  While  the  United  States  was
preoccupied with its internal war, France had deposed
Mexico’s  government  and  installed  an  emperor.  On
May  5,  1867,  Mexico  overthrew  the  French  invaders
and  executed  Emperor  Maximilian.  But  while  Mex-
ico  regained  independence,  it  lay  open  to  the  eco-
nomic  designs  of  its  increasingly  powerful  northern
neighbor.

A new model emerged for asserting U.S. power in
Latin  America  and  Asia:  not  by  direct  conquest,  but
through trade. The architect of this vision was William
Seward,  secretary  of  state  from  1861  to  1869  under
presidents  Abraham  Lincoln  and  Andrew  Johnson.
A  New  Yorker  of  grand  ambition  and  ego,  Seward
believed,  like  many  contemporaries,  that  Asia  would
become “the chief theatre of [world] events” and that
commerce  there  was  key  to  America’s  prosperity.  He
urged the Senate to purchase sites in both the Pacific and
the  Caribbean  for  naval  bases  and  refueling  stations.
When Japan changed policy and tried to close its ports
to foreigners, Seward dispatched U.S. naval vessels to
join  those  of  Britain,  France,  and  the  Netherlands  in
reopening  trade  by  force.  At  the  same  time,  Seward
urged annexation of Hawaii. He also predicted that the

