CHAPTER 16

  Conquering a Continent, 1854–1890

511

An American Merchant Ship in Yokohama Harbor, 1861

After the United States forcibly “opened” Japan to foreign trade in 1854, American and European ships and
visitors became a familiar sight in the port of Yokohama. In these 1861 prints — two panels of a ﬁve-panel
series — artist Hashimoto Sadahide meticulously details activity in Yokohama Harbor. On the left, goods are
carried onto an American merchant ship; on the right, two women dressed in Western style watch the arrival
of another boat. In the background, a steamship ﬂies the Dutch ﬂag; a rowboat heading to or from another
(unseen) ship carries the ﬂag of France. Library of Congress.

United States would one day claim the Philippines and
build a Panama canal.

his  Republican  successors  would  follow  thirty  years
later in an aggressive bid for global power.

Seward’s  short-term  achievements  were  modest.
Exhausted by civil war, Americans had little enthusiasm
for further military exploits. Seward achieved only two
significant victories. In 1868, he secured congressional
approval for the Burlingame Treaty with China, which
guaranteed the rights of U.S. missionaries in China and
set official terms for the emigration of Chinese laborers,
some  of  whom  were  already  clearing  farmland  and
building railroads in the West. That same year, Seward
negotiated  the  purchase  of  Alaska  from  Russia.  After
the Senate approved the deal, Seward waxed poetic:

Our nation with united interests blest
Not now content to poise, shall sway the rest;
Abroad our empire shall no limits know,
But like the sea in endless circles flow.

Many Americans scoffed at the purchase of Alaska, a
frigid  arctic  tract  that  skeptics  nicknamed  “Seward’s
Icebox.” But the secretary of state mapped out a path

Integrating the National Economy
Closer  to  home,  Republicans  focused  on  transporta-
tion infrastructure. Railroad development in the United
States  began  well  before  the  Civil  War,  with  the  first
locomotives  arriving  from  Britain  in  the  early  1830s.
Unlike  canals  or  roads,  railroads  offered  the  promise
of year-round, all-weather service. Loco motives could
run in the dark and never needed to rest, except to take
on coal and water. Steam engines crossed high moun-
tains and rocky gorges where pack animals could find
no  fodder  and  canals  could  never  reach.  West  of  the
Mississippi, railroads opened vast regions for farming,
trade, and tourism. A transcontinental railroad execu-
tive  was  only  half-joking  when  he  said,  “The  West  is
purely a railroad enterprise.”

Governments  could  choose  to  build  and  operate
railroads  themselves  or  promote  construction  by

