512

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

Building the Central Pacific
Railroad

In 1865, Chinese workers had labored
to build the 1,100-foot-long, 90-foot-
high trestle over the divide between the
American and Bear rivers at Secret Town
in the Sierra Nevada Mountains. In 1877,
the Chinese workers shown in this photo-
graph by Carleton Watkins were again at
work on the site, burying the trestle to
avoid replacement of the aging timbers,
which had become a ﬁre hazard. University
of California at Berkeley, Bancroft Library.

private  companies.  Unlike  most  European  countries,
the United States chose the private approach. The fed-
eral  government,  however,  provided  essential  loans,
subsidies, and grants of public land. States and locali-
ties  also  lured  railroads  with  offers  of  financial  aid,
mainly by buying railroad bonds. Without this aid, rail
networks  would  have  grown  much  more  slowly  and
would  probably  have  concentrated  in  urban  regions.
With  it,  railroads  enjoyed  an  enormous — and  reck-
less — boom. By 1900, virtually no corner of the coun-
try  lacked  rail  service  (Map  16.1).  At  the  same  time,
U.S.  railroads  built  across  the  border  into  Mexico
(America Com pared, p. 514).

Railroad  companies  transformed  American  capi-
talism. They adopted a legal form of organization, the
corporation, that enabled them to raise private capital
in prodigious amounts. In earlier decades, state legisla-
tures  had  chartered  corporations  for  specific  public
purposes, binding these creations to government goals
and  oversight.  But  over  the  course  of  the  nineteenth

century, legislatures gradually began to allow any busi-
ness to become a corporation by simply applying for a
state charter. Among the first corporations to become
large interstate enterprises, private railroads were much
freer  than  earlier  companies  to  do  as  they  pleased.
After the Civil War, they received lavish public aid with
few  strings  attached.  Their  position  was  like  that  of
American banks in late 2008 after the big federal bail-
out: even critics acknowledged that public aid to these
giant companies was good for the economy, but they
observed that it also lent government support to fabu-
lous accumulations of private wealth.

Tariffs and Economic Growth  Along with the trans-
formative  power  of  railroads,  Republicans’  protective
tariffs helped build other U.S. industries, including tex-
tiles and steel in the Northeast and Midwest and, through
tariffs on imported sugar and wool, sugar beet farming
and  sheep  ranching  in  the  West.  Tariffs  also  funded
government itself. In an era when the United States did

