CHAPTER 16

  Conquering a Continent, 1854–1890

513

Pacific
Time
Zone

Seattle

Portland

Mountain
Time
Zone

C A N A D A
Central
Time
Zone

Minneapolis-
St. Paul

Salt
Lake
City

Denver

Omaha

L.Superior

n
a
g
i
h
c
i
M
.
L

L.Huro

n

Detroit

L.Erie

Eastern
Time
Zone

L.Ontario

Buffalo

Boston

New York

Chicago

Cleveland

Pittsburgh

Cincinnati

Washington,
D.C.

San Francisco

Los Angeles

PACIFIC
OCEAN

Dallas

El Paso

Kansas
City

St. Louis

Memphis

Atlanta

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

Charleston

N

W

E

S

New Orleans

Gulf of  Me x i co

0

0

200

400 miles

200

400 kilometers

Railroad Growth between 1870 – 1890

Major rail lines in 1870
Major rail lines added 1870–1890

M E X I C O

MAP 16.1
Expansion of the Railroad System, 1870–1890

In 1860, the nation had 30,000 miles of rail track; by 1890, it had 167,000 miles. The tremendous
burst of construction during the last twenty years of that period essentially completed the nation’s
rail network, although there would be additional expansion for the next two decades. The main
areas of growth were in the South and in lands west of the Mississippi. Time zones — introduced
by the railroad companies in 1883 — are marked by the gray lines.

not levy income taxes, tariffs provided the bulk of trea-
sury revenue. The Civil War had left the Union with a
staggering  debt  of  $2.8  billion.  Tariff  income  erased
that debt and by the 1880s generated huge budget sur-
pluses — a circumstance hard to imagine today.

As  Reconstruction  faltered,  tariffs  came  under
political  fire.  Democrats  argued  that  tariffs  taxed
Amer i can consumers by denying them access to low-
cost imported goods and forcing them to pay subsidies
to U.S. manufacturers. Republicans claimed, conversely,
that  tariffs  benefitted  workers  because  they  created
jobs, blocked low-wage foreign competition, and safe-
guarded America from the kind of industrial poverty
that had arisen in Europe. According to this argument,
tariffs helped American men earn enough to support
their families; wives could devote themselves to home-
making,  and  children  could  go  to  school,  not  the

factory. For protectionist Republicans, high tariffs were
akin  to  the  abolition  of  slavery:  they  protected  and
uplifted the most vulnerable workers.

In these fierce debates, both sides were partly right.
Protective tariffs did play a powerful role in economic
growth. They helped transform the United States into a
global industrial power. Eventually, though, even pro-
tectionist  Republicans  had  to  admit  that  Democrats
had a point: tariffs had not prevented industrial pov-
erty  in  the  United  States.  Corporations  accumulated
massive  benefits  from  tariffs  but  failed  to  pass  them
along to workers, who often toiled long hours for low
wages. Furthermore, tariffs helped foster trusts, corpo-
rations that dominated whole sectors of the economy
and  wielded  near-monopoly  power.  The  rise  of  large
private  corporations  and  trusts  generated  enduring
political problems.

