A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

The Santa Fe Railroad

in Mexico and the

United States

This map, based on an 1885 traveler’s guide published by the Atchison, Topeka,
and  Santa  Fe  Railroad,  includes  the  company’s  U.S.  lines  and  also  those  of  its
Mexican Central Railroad, an ATSF subsidiary that crossed the border and termi-
nated at Guaymas and Mexico City, Mexico. The dots represent the many stops
that the trains made along the routes between major cities. Most Mexican rail-
roads in this era were built and operated by U.S. companies. As you analyze this
map,  consider  how  residents  of  the  two  countries  may  have  experienced  the
railroad’s arrival in different ways.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  In what directions could passen-
gers and freight travel on ATSF
lines in each country? What does
this suggest about the objec-
tives of railroad companies like
this one?

2.  Based on this evidence, how might
Mexicans have experienced the
arrival of railroads differently from
residents of the western United
States?

MAP 16.2
The Santa Fe Railroad System, 1885

Reno

Sacramento

Ogden

Salt Lake City

San
Francisco

Visalia

Grand
Junction

Denver

Pueblo

Kansas
City

Dodge
City

Los Angeles

Winslow

Las Vegas, NM

San Diego

Tucson

UNITED STATES

El Paso

PACIFIC
OCEAN

Chihuahua

Guaymas

W

N

S

E

M E X I C O

Lines of the Sante Fe
Railroad with Selected Stops

Railroad stop

0

0

150

300 miles

150

300 kilometers

Gulf of
 Mexico

Mexico City

The  Role  of  Courts  While  fostering  growth,  most
historians agree, Republicans did not give government
enough  regulatory  power  over  the  new  corporations.
State legislatures did pass hundreds of regulatory laws
after the Civil War, but interstate companies challenged
them in federal courts. In Munn v. Illinois (1877), the
Supreme Court affirmed that states could regulate key
businesses, such as railroads and grain elevators, that
were “clothed in the public interest.” However, the justices

feared that too many state and local regulations would
impede business and fragment the national marketplace.
Starting in the 1870s, they interpreted the “due process”
clause of the new Fourteenth Amend ment — which dic-
tated that no state could “deprive any person of life, lib-
erty, or property, without due process of law” — as shield-
ing corporations from excessive regulation. Ironically,
the Court refused to use the same amendment to pro-
tect the rights of African Americans.

514

