In the Southwest as well, federal courts promoted
economic development at the expense of racial justice.
Though  the  United  States  had  taken  control  of  New
Mexico  and  Arizona  after  the  Mexican  War,  much
land remained afterward in the hands of Mexican farm-
ers  and  ranchers.  Many  lived  as  peónes,  under  long-
standing agreements with landowners who held large
tracts  originally  granted  by  the  Spanish  crown.  The
post–Civil War years brought railroads and an influx of
land-hungry Anglos. New Mexico’s governor reported
indignantly that Mexican shepherds were often “asked”
to leave their ranges “by a cowboy or cattle herder with a
brace of pistols at his belt and a Winchester in his hands.”
Existing land claims were so complex that Congress
eventually set up a special court to rule on land titles.
Between  1891  and  1904,  the  court  invalidated  most
traditional  claims,  including  those  of  many  New
Mexico  ejidos,  or  villages  owned  collectively  by  their
communities.  Mexican  Americans  lost  about  64  per-
cent of the contested lands. In addition, much land was
sold  or  appropriated  through  legal  machinations  like
those  of  a  notorious  cabal  of  politicians  and  lawyers
known as the Santa Fe Ring. The result was displace-
ment of thousands of Mexican American villagers and
farmers. Some found work as railroad builders or mine
workers; others, moving into the sparse high country
of the Sierras and Rockies where cattle could not sur-
vive, developed sheep raising into a major enterprise.

Silver and Gold
In an era of nation building, U.S. and
European policymakers sought new ways to rationalize
markets. Industrializing nations, for example, tried to
develop an international system of standard measure-
ments and even a unified currency. Though these pro-
posals failed as each nation succumbed to self-interest,
governments did increasingly agree that, for “scientific”
reasons,  money  should  be  based  on  gold,  which  was
thought to have an intrinsic worth above other metals.
Great  Britain  had  long  held  to  the  gold  standard,
meaning  that  paper  notes  from  the  Bank  of  England
could be backed by gold held in the bank’s vaults. Dur-
ing the 1870s and 1880s, the United States, Germany,
France, and other countries also converted to gold.

Beforehand, these nations had been on a bimetallic
standard: they issued both gold and silver coins, with
respective weights fixed at a relative value. The United
States  switched  to  the  gold  standard  in  part  because
treasury officials and financiers were watching devel-
opments out west. Geologists accurately predicted the
discovery of immense silver deposits, such as Nevada’s
Comstock Lode, without comparable new gold strikes.
A massive influx of silver would clearly upset the long-

CHAPTER 16

  Conquering a Continent, 1854–1890

515

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What federal policies
contributed to the rise
of America’s industrial
economy, and what were
their results?

standing  ratio.  Thus,  with  a  law
that  became  infamous  to  later
critics  as  the  “Crime  of  1873,”
Congress  chose  gold.  It  directed
the U.S. Treasury to cease minting
silver  dollars  and,  over  a  six-
year  period,  retire  Civil  War–era
greenbacks  (paper  dollars)  and  replace  them  with
notes  from  an  expanded  system  of  national  banks.
After this process was complete in 1879, the treasury
exchanged these notes for gold on request. (Advocates
of  bimetallism  did  achieve  one  small  victory:  the
Bland-Allison  Act  of  1878  required  the  U.S.  Mint  to
coin a modest amount of silver.)

By adopting the gold standard, Republican policy-
makers  sharply  limited  the  nation’s  money  supply,  to
the level of available gold. The amount of money circu-
lating in the United States had been $30.35 per person
in  1865;  by  1880,  it  fell  to  only  $19.36  per  person.
Today,  few  economists  would  sanction  such  a  plan,
especially for an economy growing at breakneck speed.
They  would  recommend,  instead,  increasing  money
supplies  to  keep  pace  with  development.  But  at  the
time, policymakers remembered rampant antebellum
speculation and the hardships of inflation during the
Civil War. The United States, as a developing country,
also needed to attract investment capital from Britain,
Belgium, and other European nations that were on the
gold standard. Making it easy to exchange U.S. bonds
and currency for gold encouraged European investors
to send their money to the United States.

Republican policies fostered exuberant growth and a
breathtakingly  rapid  integration  of  the  economy.  Rail-
roads and telegraphs tied the nation together. U.S. manu-
facturers amassed staggering amounts of capital and built
corporations of national and even global scope. With its
immense, integrated marketplace of workers, consumers,
raw  materials,  and  finished  products,  the  United  States
was poised to become a mighty industrial power.

Incorporating the West
Republicans wanted farms as well as factories. As early
as  1860,  popular  lyrics  hailed  the  advent  of  “Uncle
Sam’s Farm”:

A welcome, warm and hearty, do we give the sons of toil,
To come west and settle and labor on Free Soil;
We’ve room enough and land enough, they needn’t feel

alarmed —

Oh!  Come  to  the  land  of  Freedom  and  vote  yourself

a farm.

