516

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

The  Homestead  Act  (1862)  gave  160  acres  of  federal
land to any applicant who occupied and improved the
property. Republicans hoped the bill would help build
up  the  interior  West,  which  was  inhabited  by  Indian
peoples  but  remained  “empty”  on  U.S.  government
survey maps.

Implementing  this  plan  required  innovative  poli-
cies.  The  same  year  it  passed  the  Homestead  Act,
Congress also created the federal Department of Agri-
culture and, through the Morrill Act, set aside 140 mil-
lion federal acres that states could sell to raise money
for public universities. The goal of these land-grant col-
leges  was  to  broaden  educational  opportunities  and
foster technical and scientific expertise. After the Civil
War, Congress also funded a series of geological sur-
veys,  dispatching  U.S.  Army  officers,  scientists,  and
photographers to chart unknown western terrain and
catalog resources.

To a large extent, these policies succeeded in incor-
porating  lands  west  of  the  Mississippi.  The  United
States began to exploit its western empire for minerals,

lumber,  and  other  raw  materials.  But  for  ordinary
Americans who went west, dreams often outran reality.
Well-financed  corporations,  not  individual  prospec-
tors,  reaped  most  of  the  profits  from  western  mines,
while the Great Plains environment proved resistant to
ranching and farming.

Mining Empires
In the late 1850s, as easy pickings in the California gold
rush  diminished,  prospectors  scattered  in  hopes  of
finding  riches  elsewhere.  They  found  gold  at  many
sites,  including  Nevada,  the  Colorado  Rockies,  and
South Dakota’s Black Hills (Map 16.3). As news of each
strike spread, remote areas turned overnight into mob
scenes of prospectors, traders, prostitutes, and saloon
keepers.  At  community  meetings,  white  prospectors
made  their  own  laws,  often  using  them  as  an  instru-
ment for excluding Mexicans, Chinese, and blacks.

The  silver  from  Nevada’s  Comstock  Lode,  discov-
ered  in  1859,  built  the  boomtown  of  Virginia  City,

Hydraulic Mining

When surface veins of gold played out, miners turned to hydraulic mining, the modern form of which was
invented in California in 1853. The technology was simple, using high-pressure streams of water to wash
away hillsides of gold-bearing soil. Although building the reservoirs, piping systems, and sluices cost money,
the proﬁts from hydraulic mining helped transform western mining into big business. But, as this daguerreo-
type suggests, the large scale on which hydraulic mining was done wreaked large-scale havoc on the
environment. Collection of Matthew Isenburg.

