WASHINGTON

(cid:6)

Coeur d’Alene

MONTANA

Butte

Florence

IDAHO

Helena

Virginia City
1862

OREGON

Silver City

Boise City

(cid:6)
1861

Weaverville

Virginia
City
1859

(cid:6)

Eureka

Austin

Aurora

NEVADA

Coloma
1848

San
Francisco
Mariposa

CALIFORNIA

Corinne

UTAH
TERRITORY

(after Francaviglia)

N. DAK.

BLACK
HILLS
1874

S. DAK.

NEBR.

Deadwood

Custer City

WYOMING

South Pass
1868

Central
City

Denver

Leadville
1876
(cid:6)
Creede

COLORADO
(cid:6)

Pike’s Peak
1859

Cripple
Creek
1890

Los Angeles

N

W

E

S

ARIZONA
TERRITORY

Wickenburg
1863

Tubac
1854

NEW MEXICO
TERRITORY

Santa
Rita

(cid:6)
Tombstone
1878

(cid:6)

TEXAS

Terlingua

Gold bonanza

Gold mining (primarily)

(cid:6)

Silver bonanza

Intermontane region
(gold, silver, copper, iron)
Rocky Mountain region
(gold, silver, lead, copper)

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

MAP 16.3
Mining Frontiers, 1848–1890

The Far West was America’s gold country because of its
geological history. Veins of gold and silver form when
molten material from the earth’s core is forced up into
ﬁssures caused by the tectonic movements that create
mountain ranges, such as the ones that dominate the
far western landscape. It was these veins, the product
of mountain-forming activity many thousands of years
earlier, that prospectors began to discover after 1848
and furiously exploit. Although widely dispersed across
the Far West, the lodes that they found followed the
mountain ranges bisecting the region and bypassing the
great plateaus not shaped by the ancient tectonic activity.

which  soon  acquired  fancy  hotels,  a  Shakespearean
theater,  and  even  its  own  stock  exchange.  In  1870,  a
hundred  saloons  operated  in  Virginia  City,  brothels
lined D Street, and men outnumbered women 2 to 1. In
the 1880s, however, as the Comstock Lode played out,
Virginia City suffered the fate of many mining camps:
it became a ghost town. What remained was a ravaged
landscape  with  mountains  of  debris,  poisoned  water
sources, and surrounding lands stripped of timber.

In  hopes  of  encouraging  development  of  western
resources, Congress passed the General Mining Act of
1872, which allowed those who discovered minerals on

CHAPTER 16

  Conquering a Continent, 1854–1890

517

federally  owned  land  to  work  the  claim  and  keep  all
the proceeds. (The law — including the $5-per-acre fee
for filing a claim — remains in force today.) Americans
idealized the notion of the lone, hardy mining prospec-
tor with his pan and his mule, but digging into deep
veins  of  underground  ore  required  big  money.  Con-
sortiums  of  powerful  investors,  bringing  engineers
and advanced equipment, generally extracted the most
wealth. This was the case for the New York trading firm
Phelps Dodge, which invested in massive copper mines
and  smelting  operations  on  both  sides  of  the  U.S.-
Mexico border. The mines created jobs in new towns
like Bisbee and Morenci, Arizona — but with danger-
ous  conditions  and  low pay,  especially  for  those  who
received the segregated “Mexican wage.” Anglos, testi-
fied  one  Mexican  mine  worker,  “occupied  decorous
residences . . . and had large amounts of money,” while
“the  Mexican  population  and  its  economic  condition
offered a pathetic contrast.” He protested this affront to
“the most elemental principles of justice.”

The  rise  of  western  mining  created  an  insatiable
market for timber and produce from the Pacific North-
west (Map 16.4). Seattle and Portland grew rapidly as

N

W

E

(cid:4)

Portland

S

1860

WASHINGTON

W

N

S

1890
Spokane
(cid:4)

(cid:4)(cid:4)
Olympia Seattle
WASHINGTON
E

(cid:4)

Portland
(cid:4)

Salem

OREGON

OREGON

Sacramento
(cid:4)
San Francisco

(cid:4)

Sacramento

(cid:4)

(cid:4)
San Francisco

CALIFORNIA

CALIFORNIA

Los Angeles

(cid:4)

San Diego

(cid:4)

Los Angeles

(cid:4)

Population Density
per Square Mile

(cid:4)

San Diego

0

0

200

400 miles

200

400 kilometers

Under 2
2 to 6
6 to 18
18 to 45
45 to 90
Over 90

MAP 16.4
Settlement of the Pacific Slope, 1860–1890

In 1860, the economic development of the Paciﬁc slope
was remarkably uneven — fully under way in northern
California and scarcely begun anywhere else. By 1890,
a new pattern had begun to emerge, with the swift
growth of southern California foreshadowed and the
Paciﬁc Northwest incor porated into the regional and
national economy.

