518

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

supply centers, especially during the great gold rushes
of California (after 1849) and the Klondike in Canada’s
Yukon  Territory  (after  1897).  Residents  of  Tacoma,
Washington, claimed theirs was the “City of Destiny”
when it became the Pacific terminus for the Northern
Pacific, the nation’s third transcontinental railroad, in
1887.  But  rival  businessmen  in  Seattle  succeeded  in
promoting their city as the gateway to Alaska and the
Klondike. Seattle, a town with 1,000 residents in 1870,
grew over the next forty years to a population of a quar-
ter million.

Cattlemen on the Plains
While  boomtowns  arose  across  the  West,  hunters
began transforming the plains. As late as the Civil War
years, great herds of bison still roamed this region. But

overhunting and the introduction of European animal
afflictions,  like  the  bacterial  disease  brucellosis,  were
already decimating the herds. In the 1870s, hide hunt-
ers finished them off so thoroughly that at  one point
fewer than two hundred bison remained in U.S. terri-
tory. Hunters hidden downwind, under the right con-
ditions, could kill four dozen at a time without moving
from the spot. They took hides but left the meat to rot,
an act of vast wastefulness that shocked native peoples.
Removal  of  the  bison  opened  opportunities  for
 cattle ranchers. South Texas provided an early model
for their ambitious plans. By the end of the Civil War,
about  five  million  head  of  longhorn  cattle  grazed  on
Anglo  ranches  there.  In  1865,  the  Missouri  Pacific
Railroad reached Sedalia, Missouri, far enough west to
be accessible as Texas reentered the Union. A longhorn
worth  $3  in  Texas  might  command  $40  at  Sedalia.

Cowboys, Real and Mythic

As early as the 1860s, popular dime novels such as this one
(right) celebrated the alleged ruggedness, individual free-
doms, and gun-slinging capabilities of western cowboys.
(Note that this 1888 story, like most dime novels, was pub-
lished in New York.) Generations of young Americans grew
up on stories of frontier valor and “Cowboys versus Indians.”
In fact, cowboys like the ones depicted in the photograph
were really wage workers on horseback. An ethnically diverse
group, including many blacks and Hispanics, they earned per-
haps $25 a month, plus meals and a bed in the bunkhouse, in
return for long hours of grueling, lonesome work. Library of
Congress; Denver Public Library/Bridgeman Art Library.

