CHAPTER 16

  Conquering a Continent, 1854–1890

519

Advertisement for Silver Pine
Healing Oil, c. 1880s

Conquest of the Great Plains was
made possible in part by the invention
of barbed wire, which could cheaply
enclose wide areas, even where trees
and wood were scarce. Inventor Joseph
Glidden received a patent in 1874 for
the most familiar form of barbed wire.
His wire proved durable, and Glidden
invented machinery to mass-produce
it — while his business associates skill-
fully promoted the product to farmers
in the West. By 1880, Glidden’s com-
pany sold 80 million pounds of barbed
wire a year. This image shows, however,
that the new “thorny fence” also had a
downside. Other businessmen proﬁted
by healing the injuries that barbed wire
caused to valuable animals. Picture
Research Consultants & Archives.

With  this  incentive,  ranchers  inaugurated  the  Long
Drive, hiring cowboys to herd cattle hundreds of miles
north to the new rail lines, which soon extended into
Kansas. At Abilene and Dodge City, Kansas, ranchers
sold their longhorns and trail-weary cowboys crowded
into  saloons.  These  cow  towns  captured  the  nation’s
imagination as symbols of the Wild West, but the real-
ity  was  much  less  exciting.  Cowboys,  many  of  them
Afri can  Americans  and  Latinos,  were  really  farm-
hands on horseback who worked long, harsh hours for
low pay.

North of Texas, public grazing lands drew investors
and  adventurers  eager  for  a  taste  of  the  West.  By  the
early  1880s,  as  many  as  7.5  million  cattle  were  over-
grazing  the  plains’  native  grasses.  A  cycle  of  good
weather  postponed  disaster,  which  arrived  in  1886:
record blizzards and bitter cold. An awful scene of rot-
ting carcasses greeted cowboys as they rode onto the
range that spring. Further hit by a severe drought the
following summer, the cattle boom collapsed.

Thanks to new strategies, however, cattle ranching
survived  and  became  part  of  the  integrated  national
economy.  As  railroads  reached  Texas  and  ranchers
there  abandoned  the  Long  Drive,  the  invention  of
barbed wire — which enabled ranchers and farmers to
fence large areas cheaply and easily on the plains, where
wood  was  scarce  and  expensive — made  it  easier  for
northern cattlemen to fence small areas and feed ani-
mals  on  hay.  Stockyards  appeared  beside  the  rapidly

extending railroad tracks, and trains took these gath-
ered cattle to giant slaughterhouses in cities like Chi-
cago, which turned them into cheap beef for customers
back east.

Homesteaders
Republicans  envisioned  the  Great  Plains  dotted  with
small  farms,  but  farmers  had  to  be  persuaded  that
crops  would  grow  there.  Powerful  interests  worked
hard to overcome the popular idea that the grassland
was the Great American Desert. Railroads, eager to sell
land  the  government  had  granted  them,  advertised
aggressively. Land speculators, transatlantic steamship
lines,  and  western  states  and  territories  joined  the
campaign.

Newcomers found the soil beneath the native prai-
rie grasses deep and fertile. Steel plows enabled them to
break through the tough roots, while barbed wire pro-
vided  cheap,  effective  fencing  against  roaming  cattle.
European  immigrants  brought  strains  of  hard-kernel
wheat  that  tolerated  the  extreme  temperatures  of  the
plains.  As  if  to  confirm  promoters’  optimism,  a  wet
cycle  occurred  between  1878  and  1886,  increasing
rainfall  in  the  arid  regions  east  of  the  Rockies.
Americans  decided  that  “rain  follows  the  plow”:
settlement was increasing rainfall. Some attributed the
rain to soil cultivation and tree planting, while others
credited  God.  One  Harvard  professor  proposed  that

