520

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

Family on the L. W. Hall Farm,
Buffalo County, Nebraska,
1903

This family has moved from their
original sod house into a new
frame house. Perhaps they asked
the photographer to include in his
image the windmill, a key to their
prosperity. Other photographs on
this property, some taken in 1907,
show thriving young trees and a
woman proudly posed with her
new hand-cranked washing
machine. How might this family
have responded to the argument,
made in this textbook chapter and
by some critics at the time, that
farming was a failure on the arid
Great Plains? What different story
might they tell about their hard-
ships and successes? Nebraska State
Historical Society.

steel railroad tracks attracted moisture. Such optimists
would soon learn their mistake.

The  motivation  for  most  settlers,  American  or
immigrant,  was  to  better  themselves  economically.
Union veterans, who received favorable terms in stak-
ing homestead claims, played a major role in settling
Kansas  and  other  plains  states.  When  severe  depres-
sion hit northern Europe in the 1870s, Norwegians and
Swedes joined German emigrants in large numbers. At
the  peak  of  “American  fever”  in  1882,  more  than
105,000  Scandinavians  left  for  the  United  States.
Swedish  and  Norwegian  became  the  primary  lan-
guages in parts of Minnesota and the Dakotas.

For  some  African  Americans,  the  plains  repre-
sented a promised land of freedom. In 1879, a group of
black communities left Mississippi and Louisiana in a
quest to escape poverty and white violence. Some 6,000
blacks  departed  together,  most  carrying  little  but  the
clothes  on  their  backs  and  faith  in  God.  They  called
themselves Exodusters, participants in a great exodus
to  Kansas.  The  1880  census  reported  40,000  blacks
there, by far the largest African American concentra-
tion in the West aside from Texas, where the expanding
cotton  frontier  attracted  hundreds  of  thousands  of
black migrants.

For  newcomers,  taming  the  plains  differed  from
pioneering in antebellum Iowa or Oregon. Dealers sold
big new machines to help with plowing and harvesting.

Western wheat traveled by rail to giant grain elevators
and  traded  immediately  on  world  markets.  Hoping
frontier  land  values  would  appreciate  rapidly,  many
farmers planned to profit from selling acres as much as
(or more than) from their crops. In boom times, many
rushed into debt to acquire more land and better equip-
ment.  All  these  enthusiasms — for  cash  crops,  land
speculation, borrowed money, and new technology —
bore witness to the conviction that farming was, as one
agricultural journal remarked, a business “like all other
business.”

Women in the West  Early miners, lumbermen, and
cowboys  were  overwhelmingly  male,  but  homestead-
ing was a family affair. The success of a farm depended
on the work of wives and children who tended the gar-
den  and  animals,  preserved  food,  and  helped  out  at
harvest time. Some women struck out on their own: a
study of North Dakota found between 5 and 20 percent
of  homestead  claims  filed  by  single  women,  often
working land adjacent to that of sisters, brothers, and
parents. Family members thus supported one another
in the difficult work of farming, while easing the lone-
liness many newcomers felt. Looking back with pride
on  her  homesteading  days,  one  Dakota  woman  said
simply, “It was a place to stay and it was mine.”

While  promoting  farms  in  the  West,  Republicans
clashed  with  the  distinctive  religious  group  that  had

