already  settled  Utah:  Mormons,  or  members  of  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  (LDS).
After  suffering  persecution  in  Missouri  and  Illinois,
Mormons  had  moved  west  to  Utah  in  the  1840s,
attracting many working-class converts from England
as well. Most Americans at the time were deeply hostile
to  Mormonism,  especially  the  LDS  practice  of  plural
marriage — sanctioned  by  church  founder  Joseph
Smith — through  which  some  Mormon  men  married
more than one wife.

Mormons had their own complex view of women’s
role,  illustrated  by  the  career  of  Mormon  leader
Emmeline Wells. Born in New Hampshire, Emmeline
converted  to  Mormonism  at  age  thirteen  along  with
her  mother  and  joined  the  exodus  to  Utah  in  1848.
After her first husband abandoned her when he left the
church, Emmeline became the seventh wife of church
elder Daniel Wells. In 1870, due in part to organized
pressure  from  Wells  and  other  Mormon  women,  the
Utah  legislature  granted  full  voting  rights  to  women,
becoming  the  second  U.S.  territory  to  do  so  (after
Wyoming, in 1869). The measure increased LDS con-
trol,  since  most  Utah  women  were  Mormons,  while
non-Mormons  in  mining  camps  were  predominantly
male. It also recognized the central role of women in
Mormon life.

Amid the constitutional debates of Reconstruction,
polygamy  and  women’s  voting  rights  became  inter-
twined issues (American Voices, p. 522). Encouraged
by other plural wives, Emmeline Wells began in 1877
to write for a Salt Lake City newspaper, the Woman’s
Exponent. She served as editor for forty years and led
local women’s rights groups. At first, Utah’s legislature
blocked Wells’s candidacy in a local election, based on
her sex. But when Utah won statehood in 1896, Wells
had the pleasure of watching several women win seats
in  the  new  legislature,  including  Dr.  Martha  Hughes
Cannon,  a  physician  and  Mormon  plural  wife  who
became the first American woman to serve in a state
senate. Like their counterparts in other western states,
Utah’s  women  experienced  a  combination  of  severe
frontier hardships and striking new opportunities.

Environmental  Challenges  Homesteaders  faced  a
host  of  challenges,  particularly  the  natural  environ-
ment of the Great Plains. Clouds of grasshoppers could
descend and destroy a crop in a day; a prairie fire or
hailstorm could do the job in an hour. In spring, home-
steaders faced sudden, terrifying tornados, while their
winter experiences in the 1870s added the word bliz-
zard to America’s vocabulary. On the plains, also, water
and lumber were hard to find. Newly arrived families

CHAPTER 16

  Conquering a Continent, 1854–1890

521

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
Compare the development
of mining, ranching, and
farming in the West. How
did their environmental
consequences differ?

often  cut  dugouts  into  hillsides
and  then,  after  a  season  or  two,
erected  houses  made  of  turf  cut
from the ground.

Over  the  long  term,  home-
steaders discovered that the west-
ern  grasslands  did  not  receive
enough  rain  to  grow  wheat  and
other grains. As the cycle of rainfall shifted from wet to
dry, farmers as well as ranchers suffered. “A  wind hot as
an oven’s fury . . . raged like a pestilence,” reported one
Nebraskan, leaving “farmers helpless, with no weapon
against  this  terrible  and  inscrutable  wrath  of  nature.”
By the late 1880s, some recently settled lands emptied
as  homesteaders  fled  in  defeat — 50,000  from  the
Dakotas alone. It  became obvious that farming in the
arid West required methods other than those used east
of the Mississippi.

Clearly, 160-acre homesteads were the wrong size
for  the  West:  farmers  needed  either  small  irrigated
plots  or  immense  tracts  for  dry  farming,  which
involved deep planting to bring subsoil moisture to the
roots and quick harrowing after rainfalls to slow evap-
oration.  Dry  farming  developed  most  fully  on  huge
corporate  farms  in  the  Red  River  Valley  of  North
Dakota.  But  even  family  farms,  the  norm  elsewhere,
could not survive on less than 300 acres of grain. Crop
prices were too low, and the climate too unpredictable,
to allow farmers to get by on less.

In  this  struggle,  settlers  regarded  themselves  as
nature’s conquerors, striving, as one pioneer remarked,
“to get the land subdued and the wilde nature out of it.”
Much about its “wilde nature” was hidden to the new-
comers. They did not know that destroying biodiver-
sity, which was what  farming the plains really meant,
opened  pathways  for  exotic,  destructive  pests  and
weeds,  and  that  removing  native  grasses  left  the  soil
vulnerable to erosion. By the turn of the twentieth cen-
tury, about half the nation’s cattle and sheep, one-third
of its cereal crops, and nearly three-fifths of its wheat
came from the Great Plains. But in the drier parts of
the region, it was not a sustainable achievement. This
renowned breadbasket was later revealed to be, in the
words of one historian, “the largest, longest-run agri-
cultural and environmental miscalculation in Ameri-
can history.”

John  Wesley  Powell,  a  one-armed  Union  veteran,
predicted  the  catastrophe  from  an  early  date.  Powell,
employed  by  the  new  U.S.  Geological  Survey,  led  a
famous expedition in the West in which his team navi-
gated  the  rapids  of  the  Colorado  River  through  the
Grand Canyon in wooden boats. In his Report on the

