A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Women’s Rights

in the West

In 1870, Utah’s territorial legislature granted voting rights to women. The deci-
sion was a shock to advocates of women’s suffrage in the East: they expected
their  ﬁrst  big  victories  would  come  in  New  England.  Furthermore,  Utah  was
overwhelmingly peopled by Mormons — members of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints (LDS). Critics saw Mormonism as a harshly patriarchal reli-
gion.  They  especially  loathed  the  Mormon  practice  of  “plural  marriage,”  in
which some Mormon men took more than one wife. Most easterners thought
this practice was barbaric and demeaning to women. Over the next two decades,
Republicans pressured Mormons to abolish plural marriage. They also disenfran-
chised Mormon women and required men to take an anti-polygamy oath; Con-
gress refused to admit Utah as a state. Only after 1890, when the LDS church
ofﬁcially abolished plural marriage, was Utah statehood possible. In 1896, when
Utah became a state, women’s voting rights were ﬁnally reinstated.

Fanny Stenhouse
Exposé of Polygamy: A Lady’s Life Among
the Mormons (1872)

An Englishwoman who converted to the faith and moved
to  Utah,  Stenhouse  became  disillusioned  and  published
her book to criticize the practice of Mormon polygamy.

How little do the Mormon men of Utah know what it is,
in the truest sense, to have a wife, though they have so
many “wives,” after their own fashion. Almost impercep-
tibly to the husband, and even the wife herself, a barrier
rises between them the very day that he marries another
woman. It matters not how much she believes in the doc-
trine of plural marriages, or how willing she may be to
submit to it; the fact remains the same. The estrangement
begins by her trying to hide from him all secret sorrow;
for she feels that what has been can not be undone now,
and she says, “I cannot change it; neither would I if I
could, because it is the will of God, and I must bear it;
besides, what good will it do to worry my husband with
all my feelings?”

. . . A man may have a dozen wives; but from the
whole of them combined he will not receive as much
real love and devotion as he might from one alone, if
he had made her feel that she had his undivided affec-
tion and confidence. How terribly these men deceive
themselves! When peace, or rather quiet, reigns in their
homes, they think that the spirit of God is there. But it is
not so! It is a calm, not like the gentle silence of sleep, but
as the horrible stillness of death — the death of the heart’s
best affections, and all that is worth calling love. All true
love has fled, and indifference has taken its place. The
very children feel it. What do they — what can they
care about their fathers? They seldom see them.

522

Whatever, in the providence of God, may be the
action of Congress toward Utah, if the word of a feeble
woman can be listened to, let me respectfully ask the
Honorable Senators and Representatives of the United
States that, in the abolition of Polygamy, if such should
be the decree of the nation, let no compromise be made
where subtlety can bind the woman now living in Polyg-
amy to remain in that condition.

Source: Exposé of Polygamy: A Lady’s Life Among the Mormons, ed. Linda Wilcox
DeSimone (Logan: Utah State University Press, 2008), 72–73, 155.

Eliza Snow, Harriet Cook Young, Phoebe Woodruff
A Defense of Plural Marriage

The vast majority of Mormon women defended their faith
and  the  practice  of  plural  marriage.  The  statements  by
Eliza  Snow,  Harriet  Cook  Young,  and  Phoebe  Woodruff,
below, were made at a public protest meeting in Salt Lake
City in 1870. LDS women pointed proudly to their new suf-
frage  rights  as  proof  of  their  religion’s  just  treatment  of
women. Why did Mormons, who dominated the Utah leg-
islature,  give  women  full  voting  rights?  In  part,  they
sought to protect their church by increasing Mormon vot-
ing  power:  most  of  the  non-Mormons  were  single  men
who worked on ranches or in mining camps. But the LDS
Church also celebrated women’s central role in the family
and  community.  Some  women  achieved  prominence  as
midwives, teachers, and professionals.

Eliza Snow: Our enemies pretend that, in Utah, woman
is held in a state of vassalage — that she does not act from
choice, but by coercion — that we would even prefer life
elsewhere, were it possible for us to make our escape.
What nonsense! We all know that if we wished we could

