leave at any time — either go singly, or to rise en masse,
and there is no power here that could, or would wish to,
prevent us. I will now ask this assemblage of intelligent
ladies, do you know of anyplace on the face of the earth,
where woman has more liberty, and where she enjoys
such high and glorious privileges as she does here, as a
latter-day saint? No! The very idea of woman here in a
state of slavery is a burlesque on good common sense.

Harriet Cook Young: Wherever monogamy reigns, adul-
tery, prostitution and foeticide, directly or indirectly, are
its concomitants. . . . The women of Utah comprehend
this; and they see, in the principle of plurality of wives,
the only safeguard against adultery, prostitution, and the
reckless waste of pre-natal life, practiced throughout the
land.

Phoebe Woodruff: God has revealed unto us the law of
the patriarchal order of marriage, and commanded us
to obey it. We are sealed to our husbands for time and
eternity, that we may dwell with them and our children
in the world to come; which guarantees unto us the great-
est blessing for which we are created. If the rulers of the
nation will so far depart from the spirit and letter of our
glorious constitution as to deprive our prophets, apostles
and elders of citizenship, and imprison them for obeying
this law, let them grant this, our last request, to make their
prisons large enough to hold their wives, for where they
go we will go also.

tried to change the debate to focus on the vulnerability of
all married women to exploitation by their husbands. Her
report from Utah, published in her journal The Revolution,
is below.

Woman’s work in monogamy and polygamy is essentially
one and the same — that of planting her feet on the solid
ground of self-support; . . . there is and can be no salva-
tion for womanhood but in the possession of power over
her own subsistence.

The saddest feature here is that there really is nothing

by which these women can earn an independent liveli-
hood for themselves and children. No manufacturing
establishments; no free schools to teach. Women here,
as everywhere, must be able to live honestly and honor-
ably without men, before it can be possible to save the
masses of them from entering into polygamy or prostitu-
tion, legal or illegal. Whichever way I turn, whatever
phase of social life presents itself, the same conclusion
comes — independent bread alone can redeem woman
from her sure subjection to man. . . .

Here is missionary ground. Not for “thus saith the Lord,”
divine rights, canting priests, or echoing priestesses of any
sect whatsoever; but for great, god-like, humanitarian
men and women, who “feel for them in bonds as bound
with them,” . . . a simple, loving, sisterly clasp of hands
with these struggling women, and an earnest work with
them. Not to modify nor ameliorate, but to ABOLISH
the whole system of woman’s subjection to man in both
polygamy and monogamy.

Source: Edward W. Tullidge, Women of Mormondom (New York: Tullidge & Crandall,
1877), 390–391, 396, 400.

Source: The Revolution, July 20, 1871.

Susan B. Anthony
Letter to The Revolution, July 5, 1871

National women’s suffrage leaders responded awkwardly
to  the  Utah  suffrage  victory.  Being  associated  with
Mormons,  they  understood,  damaged  their  fragile  new
movement in the eyes of most Americans. But they tried
tentatively  to  forge  alliances  with  Mormon  women  they
viewed as progressive, as well as dissidents in the church.
Suffrage  leader  Susan  B.  Anthony  traveled  to  Salt  Lake
City in 1871 to try to forge alliances with Mormon women,
especially  dissidents  such  as  Fanny  Stenhouse.  Anthony
expressed  strong  disapproval  of  polygamy,  but  she  also

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  What arguments did the Mormon women make in
defense of plural marriage? On what grounds did
Stenhouse argue for its abolition?

2.  Susan B. Anthony’s letter was published in Boston. How
might Mormon women have reacted to it? How might
non-Mormon women have reacted to the statements by
Snow, Young, and Woodruff?

3.  Compare the experiences of plural marriage described
by Stenhouse, on the one hand, and Snow, Young, and
Woodruff, on the other. How do you account for these
very different perspectives?

523

