524

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

Lands  of  the  Arid  Region  of  the  United  States  (1879),
Powell told Congress bluntly that 160-acre homesteads
would  not  work  in  dry  regions.  Impressed  with  the
success of Mormon irrigation projects in Utah, Powell
urged the United States to follow their model. He pro-
posed  that  the  government  develop  the  West’s  water
resources,  building  dams  and  canals  and  organizing
landowners into local districts to operate them. Doubt-
ing  that  rugged  individualism  would  succeed  in  the
West,  Powell  proposed  massive  cooperation  under
govern ment control.

After heated debate, Congress rejected Powell’s plan.
Critics accused him of playing into the hands of large
ranching corporations; boosters were not yet willing to
give  up  the  dream  of  small  homesteads.  But  Powell
turned out to be right. Though environmental historians
do  not  always  agree  with  Powell’s
proposed solutions, they point to
his  Report  on  Arid  Lands  as  a
cogent  critique  of  what  went
wrong on the Great Plains. Later,

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors led to the
creation of the ﬁrst
national parks?

federal funding paid for dams and canals that supported
intensive agriculture in many parts of the West.

The First National Park
Powell was not the only one rethinking land use. The
West’s  incorporation  into  the  national  marketplace
occurred with such speed that some Americans began
to fear rampant overdevelopment. Perhaps the federal
government should not sell off all its public land, but
instead hold and manage some of it. Amid the heady
initiatives  of  Reconstruction,  Congress  began  to  pre-
serve  sites  of  unusual  natural  splendor.  As  early  as
1864, Congress gave 10 square miles of the Yosemite
Valley to California for “public use, resort, and recre-
ation.” (In 1890, Yosemite reverted to federal control.)
In  1872,  it  set  aside  2  million  acres  of  Wyoming’s
Yellowstone  Valley  as  the  world’s  first  national  park:
preserved as a public holding, it would serve as “a pub-
lic park or pleasuring ground for the benefit and enjoy-
ment of the people.”

The Yo-Hamite Falls, 1855

This is one of the earliest artistic renderings of
the Yosemite Valley, drawn, in fact, before the
place came to be called Yosemite. The scale of
the waterfall, which drops 2,300 feet to the
valley below, is dramatized by artist Thomas A.
Ayres’s companions in the foreground. In this
romantic lithograph, one can already see the
grandeur of the West that Yosemite came to
represent for Americans. University of California
at Berkeley, Bancroft Library.

