CHAPTER 16

  Conquering a Continent, 1854–1890

525

Railroad tourism, which developed side by side with
other western industries, was an important motive for
the creation of Yellowstone National Park. The North-
ern Pacific Railroad lobbied Congress vigorously to get
the park established. Soon, luxury Pullman cars ushered
visitors to Yellowstone’s hotel, operated by the railroad
itself. But creation of the park was fraught with compli-
cations.  Since  no  one  knew  exactly  what  a  “national
park” was or how to operate it, the U.S. Army was dis-
patched  to  take  charge;  only  in  the  early  1900s,  when
Congress established many more parks in the West, did
consistent  management  policies  emerge.  In  the  mean-
time, soldiers spent much of their time arresting native
peoples who sought to hunt on Yellowstone lands.

The creation of Yellowstone was an important step
toward an ethic of respect for land and wildlife. So was
the 1871 creation of a U.S. Fisheries Commission, which
made  recommendations  to  stem  the  decline  in  wild
fish; by the 1930s, it merged with other federal wildlife
bureaus to become the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
At  the  same  time,  eviction  of  Indians  showed  that
defining  small  preserves  of  “uninhabited  wilderness”
was  part  of  conquest  itself.  In  1877,  for  example,  the
federal  government  forcibly  removed  the  Nez  Perce
tribe from their ancestral land in what  is now Idaho,
Washington,  and  Oregon.  Under  the  leadership  of
young  Chief  Joseph,  the  Nez  Perces  tried  to  flee  to
Canada.  After  a  journey  of  1,100  miles,  they  were
forced  to  surrender  just  short  of  the  border.  During
their  trek,  five  bands  crossed  Yellowstone;  as  a  Nez
Perce  named  Yellow  Wolf  recalled,  they  “knew  that

country well.” For thirteen days, Nez Perce men raided
the  valley  for  supplies,  waylaying  several  groups  of
tourists.  The  conflict  made  national  headlines.  East-
erners, proud of their new “pleasuring ground,” were
startled to find that it remained a site of native resis-
tance.  Americans  were  not  settling  an  empty  West.
They were unsettling it by taking it from native peoples
who already lived there.

A Harvest of Blood: Native
Peoples Dispossessed
Before the Civil War, when most Americans believed
the prairie could not be farmed, Congress reserved the
Great Plains for Indian peoples. But in the era of steel
plows  and  railroads,  policymakers  suddenly  had  the
power and desire to incorporate the whole region. The
U.S. Army fought against the loosely federated Sioux —
the major power on the northern grasslands — as well
as other peoples who had agreed to live on reservations
but  found  conditions  so  desperate  that  they  fled
(Map 16.5). These “reservation wars,” caused largely by
local  violence  and  confused  federal  policies,  were
messy and bitter. Pointing to failed military campaigns,
army atrocities, and egregious corruption in the Indian
Bureau,  reformers  called  for  new  policies  that  would
destroy  native  people’s  traditional  lifeways  and  “civi-
lize” them — or, as one reformer put it, “kill the Indian
and save the man.”

Killing the Bison

This woodcut shows passengers shoot-
ing bison from a Kansas Paciﬁc Railroad
train — a small thrill added to the modern
convenience of traveling west by rail. By
the end of the 1870s, the plains bison
shown here, which once numbered in the
tens of millions and had been a large part
of the Plains Indians’ way of life, had been
hunted almost to extinction. North Wind
Picture Archives.

