526

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

QUINAULT

SALISH COLVILLE

CHINOOK

WASH.

YAKIMA

BLACKFEET

Chief Joseph’s
Route

C A N A D A

Bear Paw Mtn.
(Chief Joseph surrenders), 1877

N. DAK.

MONT.

Little Big
Horn, 1876

Misso
ur
i
R

.

MANDAN

SIOUX

CAYUSE

Columbia R.

UMPQUA

WALLA
WALLA

E

COOS

ORE.

W

N

S

HUIA

YUROK

MAIDU

POMO

PAIUTE

NEV.

PACIFI C
O CEA N

CALIF.

CHUMASH

NEZ
PERCÉ

IDAHO

Snake R.

CROW

Bozeman
Trail

WYO.

SHOSHONE

ARIKARA
BLACK HILLS

Fetterman
 Massacre, 1866

S. DAK.

Dakota Sioux
Uprising, 1862

Minnesota  R.

SIOUX

SIOUX
 Wounded Knee
 Massacre, 1890

CHEYENNE

Great
Salt
Lake

UTE

PAIUTE

UTAH

Colorado R.

NAVAJO

ARAPAHO

COLO.

Sand Creek
Massacre, 1864

NEB.

Platte R.
PAWNEE

KANS.

APACHE

CHEYENNE

Arkansas   R.

CHIPPEWA

MINN.

CHIPPEWA
WIS.

MENOMINEE

WINNEBAGO

IOWA

IOWA

SAUK
AND FOX

ILL.

HAVASUPAI

HOPI

SERRANO

MOHAVE

ARIZ.
TERR.

YUMA

APACHE

PIMA

ZUÑI

TAOS

PUEBLO

N. MEX.
TERR.

Skeleton Canyon
(Geronimo surrenders), 1886

MO.

ARK.

pi   R.
Mississip

MISS.

KIOWA

COMANCHE

Red River War
1874-75

OSAGE

CHEROKEE

INDIAN TERR.

CREEK

SEMINOLE
CHOCTAW

CHICKASAW

Red R.

APACHE

CADDO

LA.

TONKAWA

TEXAS

Rio Grande

M E X I C O

Gulf of Mexico

0

0

100

200 miles

100 200 kilometers

Indian-Ceded Lands
Before 1850

1850–1870

1870–1890

Reservations, 1890

Selected battles

Tribal locations reflect
situation in the 1840s

MAP 16.5
Indian Country in the West, to 1890

As settlement pushed onto the Great Plains after the Civil War, native peoples put up bitter resis-
t ance but ultimately to no avail. Over a period of decades, they ceded most of their lands to the
federal government, and by 1890 they were conﬁned to scattered reservations.

The Civil War and Indians on the Plains
In  August  1862,  the  attention  of  most  Unionists
and  Confederates  was  riveted  on  General  George
McClellan’s  failing  campaign  in  Virginia.  But  in
Minnesota,  the  Dakota  Sioux  were  increasingly  frus-
trated. In 1858, the year Minnesota secured statehood,
they had agreed to settle on a strip of land reserved by
the government, in exchange for receiving regular pay-
ments  and  supplies.  But  Indian  agents,  contractors,
and  even  Minnesota’s  territorial  governor  pocketed
most  of  the  funds.  When  the  Dakotas  protested  that
their  children  were  starving,  state  officials  dismissed
their  appeals.  Corruption  was  so  egregious  that  one

leading Minnesotan, Episcopal bishop Henry Whipple,
wrote an urgent appeal to President James Buchanan.
“A nation which sows robbery,” he warned, “will reap a
harvest of blood.”

Whipple’s  prediction  proved  correct.  During  the
summer  of  1862,  a  decade  of  anger  boiled  over.  In  a
surprise attack, Dakota fighters fanned out through the
Minnesota countryside, killing immigrants and burn-
ing farms. They planned to sweep eastward to St. Paul
but were stopped at Fort Ridgely. In the end, more than
four  hundred  whites  lay  dead,  including  women  and
children from farms and small towns. Thousands fled;
panicked officials telegraphed for aid, spreading hyste-
ria from Wisconsin to Colorado.

