CHAPTER 16

  Conquering a Continent, 1854–1890

527

Enclosed Dakota Camp at Fort Snelling, Minnesota, 1862

During the trial of Dakota warriors involved in the 1862 rebellion, and through the harsh Minnesota winter
that followed, more than a thousand members of the tribe were imprisoned in an enormous enclosure on
Pike Island, near St. Paul. A measles epidemic broke out in the crowded camp and dozens died, especially
children. Though U.S. soldiers were often unfriendly toward their captives, local sentiment was even more
hostile; troops regularly marched through the camp, in part to protect the Dakotas from vigilante violence.
In 1863 all members of the tribe were forcibly removed from the state. In November 1862, photographer
Benjamin Franklin Upton captured this image of Dakota tents in the Pike Island enclosure. Minnesota
Historical Society.

Minnesotans’ ferocious response to the uprising set
the stage for further conflict. A hastily appointed mili-
tary court, bent on revenge, sentenced 307 Dakotas to
death, making it clear that rebellious Indians would be
treated  as  criminals  rather  than  warriors.  President
Abraham Lincoln reviewed the trial records and com-
muted most of the sentences but authorized the deaths
of 38 Dakota men. They were hanged just after Christ-
mas 1862 in the largest mass execution in U.S. history.
Two months later, Congress canceled all treaties with
the Dakotas, revoked their annuities, and expelled them
from Minnesota. The scattered bands fled west to join
nonreservation allies.

As the uprising showed, the Civil War created two
dangerous  conditions  in  the  West,  compounding  the
problems already caused by corruption. With the Union
army fighting the Confederacy, western whites felt vul-
nerable  to  Indian  attacks.  They  also  discovered  they
could fight Indians with minimal federal oversight. In
the wake of the Dakota uprising, worried Coloradans
favored a military campaign against the Cheyennes —
allies  of  the  Sioux — even  though  the  Che yennes  had
shown  little  evidence  of  hostility.  Colorado  militia
leader  John  M.  Chivington,  an  aspiring  politician,
determined to quell public anxiety and make his career.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors led to
warfare between whites
and native peoples on the
plains?

In May 1864, Cheyenne chief
Black  Kettle,  fearing  his  band
would be attacked, consulted with
U.S.  agents,  who  instructed  him
to settle along Sand Creek in east-
ern Colorado until a treaty could
be  signed.  On  November  29,  1864,  Chivington’s
Colorado militia attacked the camp while most of the
men were out hunting, slaughtering more than a hun-
dred  women  and  children.  “I  killed  all  I  could,”  one
officer testified later. “I think and earnestly believe the
Indian to be an obstacle to civilization and should be
exterminated.” Captain Silas Soule, who served under
Chivington  but  refused  to  give  his  men  the  order  to
fire,  dissented.  “It  was  hard  to  see  little  children  on
their  knees,”  he  wrote  later,  “having  their  brains  beat
out  by  men  professing  to  be  civilized.”  Chivington’s
men rode back for a celebration in Denver, where they
hung Cheyenne scalps (and women’s genitals) from the
rafters of the Apollo Theater.

The northern plains exploded in conflict. Infuriated
by  the  Sand  Creek  massacre,  Cheyennes  carried  war
pipes  to  the  Arapahos  and  Sioux,  who  attacked  and
burned white settlements along the South Platte River.
Ordered to subdue these peoples, the U.S. Army failed

