528

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

miserably:  officers  could  not  even  locate  the  enemy,
who  traveled  rapidly  in  small  bands  and  knew  the
country well. A further shock occurred in December
1866  when  1,500  Sioux  warriors  executed  a  perfect
ambush, luring Captain William Fetterman and 80 sol-
diers from a Wyoming fort and wiping them out. With
the Fetterman massacre, the Sioux succeeded in clos-
ing the Bozeman Trail, a private road under army pro-
tection that had served as the main route into Montana.
General  William  Tecumseh  Sherman,  now  com-
manding the army in the West, swore to defeat defiant
Indians.  But  the  Union  hero  met  his  match  on  the
plains. Another year of fighting proved expensive and
inconclusive. In 1868, the Sioux, led by the Oglala band
under Chief Red Cloud, told a peace commission they
would  not  sign  any  treaty  unless  the  United  States
pledged  to  abandon  all  its  forts  along  the  Bozeman
Trail. The commission agreed. Red Cloud had won.

In the wake of these events, eastern public opinion
turned against the Indian wars, which seemed at best
ineffective, at worst brutal. Congress held hearings on
the slaughter at Sand Creek. Though Chivington, now
a civilian, was never prosecuted, the massacre became
an  infamous  example  of  western  vigilantism.  By  the
time Ulysses Grant entered the White House in 1869,
the authors of Reconstruction in the South also began
to  seek  solutions  to  what  they  called  the  “Indian
problem.”

Grant’s Peace Policy
Grant  inherited  an  Indian  policy  in  disarray.  Federal
incompetence  was  highlighted  by  yet  another  mass
killing of friendly Indians in January 1870, this time on
the Marias River in Montana, by an army detachment
that shot and burned to death 173 Piegans (Blackfeet).
Having  run  out  of  other  options,  Grant  introduced
a  peace  policy,  based  on  recommendations  from
Christ ian  advisors.  He  offered  selected  appointments
to the reformers — including many former abolition-
ists — who  had  created  such  groups  as  the  Indian
Rights  Association  and  the  Women’s  National  Indian
Association.

Rejecting  the  virulent  anti-Indian  stance  of  many
westerners,  reformers  argued  that  native  peoples  had
the innate capacity to become equal with whites. They
believed,  however,  that  Indians  could  achieve  this
only  if  they  embraced  Christianity  and  white  ways.
Reformers thus aimed to destroy native languages, cul-
tures, and religions. Despite humane intentions, their
condescension  was  obvious.  They  ignored  dissenters
like Dr. Thomas Bland of the National Indian Defense

Association, who suggested that instead of an “Indian
problem”  there  might  be  a  “white  problem” — refusal
to permit Indians to follow their own lifeways. To most
nineteenth-century  Americans,  such  a  notion  was
shocking  and  uncivilized.  Increasingly  dismissive  of
blacks’ capacity for citizenship and hostile toward “hea-
then” Chinese immigrants, white Americans were even
less willing to understand and respect Indian cultures.
They believed that in the modern world, native peoples
were  fated  for  extinction  (Thinking  Like  a  Historian,
p. 530).

Indian Boarding Schools  Reformers focused their
greatest  energy  on  educating  the  next  generation.
Realizing that acculturation — adoption of white ways —
was difficult when children lived at home, agents and
missionaries  created  off-reservation  schools.  Native
families were exhorted, bullied, and bribed into send-
ing their children to these schools, where, in addition
to school lessons, boys learned farming skills and girls
practiced  housekeeping.  “English  only”  was  the  rule;
students  were  punished  if  they  spoke  their  own  lan-
guages. Mourning Dove, a Salish girl from what is now
Washington  State,  remembered  that  her  school  “ran
strictly.  We  never  talked  during  meals  without  per-
mission,  given  only  on  Sunday  or  special  holidays.
Otherwise there was silence — a terrible silent silence. I
was used to the freedom of the forest, and it was hard
to  learn  this  strict  discipline.  I  was  punished  many
times  before  I  learned.”  The  Lakota  boy  Plenty  Kill,
who at boarding school received the new name Luther,
remembered his loneliness and fear upon arrival: “The
big boys would sing brave songs, and that would start
the girls to crying. . . . The girls’ quarters were about a
hundred  and  fifty  yards  from  ours,  so  we  could  hear
them.” After having his hair cut short, Plenty Kill felt a
profound change in his identity. “None of us slept well
that night,” he recalled. “I felt that I was no more Indian,
but would be an imitation of a white man.”

To see a longer excerpt of Mourning Dove’s
autobiography, along with other primary sources
from this period, see Sources for America’s History.

Even in the first flush of reform zeal, Grant’s poli-
cies  faced  major  hurdles.  Most  Indians  had  been
pushed  off  traditional  lands  and  assigned  to  barren
ground that would have defeated the most enterprising
farmer. Poverty and dislocation left Indians especially
vulnerable  to  the  ravages  of  infectious  diseases  like
measles  and  scarlet  fever.  At  the  same  time,  Quaker,
Presbyterian,  and  Methodist  reformers  fought  turf

