CHAPTER 16

  Conquering a Continent, 1854–1890

529

Red Cloud’s Bedroom, 1891

Taken on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota by photographer C. G. Morledge, this photograph
shows the bedroom of Red Cloud, a distinguished Oglala Lakota leader. Red Cloud had won a war against
the U.S. Army just after the Civil War. He negotiated so tenaciously and shrewdly, afterward, with what he
saw as meddlesome Indian agents, that his people nicknamed Pine Ridge “The Place Where Everything Is
Disputed.” Some of the contents of Red Cloud’s bedroom may surprise you. How do you interpret the pres-
ence of ﬁve American ﬂags? The visual images on the walls? What strategies and ways of life, blending old
and new, does the photograph suggest? Compare it to Edward S. Curtis, “Little Plume and Yellow Kidney”
(p. 533). In what ways did Morledge and Curtis craft different representations of Indian life? Denver Public
Library/Bridgeman Art Library.

battles among themselves and with Catholic mission-
aries. Many traders and agents also continued to steal
money and supplies from people they were supposed
to  protect.  In  the  late  1870s,  Rutherford  B.  Hayes’s
administration  undertook  more  housecleaning  at  the
Bureau of Indian Affairs, but corruption lingered.

From  the  Indians’  point  of  view,  reformers  often
became just another interest group in a crowded field
of whites sending hopelessly mixed messages. The atti-
tudes  of  individual  army  representatives,  agents,  and
missionaries ranged from courageous and sympathetic
to  utterly  ruthless.  Many  times,  after  chiefs  thought
they had reached a face-to-face agreement, they found
it  drastically  altered  by  Congress  or  Washington
bureaucrats.  Nez  Perce  leader  Joseph  observed  that
“white  people  have  too  many  chiefs.  They  do  not
understand each other. . . . I cannot understand why so

many chiefs are allowed to talk so
many different ways, and promise
so  many  different  things.”  A
Kiowa  chief  agreed:  “We  make
but  few  contracts,  and  them  we
remember well. The whites make
so  many  they  are  liable  to  forget
them.  The  white  chief  seems  not
to be able to govern his braves.”

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
How did post–Civil War
reformers believe they
were improving U.S. Indian
policies, and in what ways
did that prove to be true
and untrue?

Native peoples were nonetheless forced to accom-
modate,  as  independent  tribal  governance  and  treaty
making  came  to  an  end.  Back  in  the  1830s,  the  U.S.
Supreme Court had declared Indians no longer sover-
eign  but  rather  “domestic  dependent  nations.”  On  a
practical  basis,  however,  both  the  U.S.  Senate  and
agents in the field continued to negotiate treaties as late
as 1869. Two years later, the House of Representatives,

