T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Representing Indians

The documents below, designed for white audiences, all depict American Indi-
ans in the West.

1.  Buffalo Bill Cody’s Wild West advertisement, 1899. Cody never called the Wild West a “show,” placing tre-

mendous emphasis on its allegedly authentic reenactments of events.

Superstock.

2.  Lewis Henry Morgan, Ancient Society, 1877.

 Morgan, a leading American anthropologist, stud-
ied the Iroquois and other native peoples. In 1877
he published an inﬂuential theory of human
development, ranking various peoples in their
“progress” from the “lowest stage of savagery”
through the pinnacle of “civilization” — northern
Europeans.

Some tribes and families have been left in geographical
isolation to work out the problems of progress. . . .
[Others] have been adulterated through external influ-
ence. Thus, while Africa was and is an ethnical chaos of
savagery and barbarism, Australia and Polynesia were
in savagery, pure and simple. . . . The Indian family of
America, unlike any other existing family, exemplified
the condition of mankind in three successive ethnical

TABLE 16.1

Status of Civilization (from Morgan, Ancient Society, 1877)

I. Lower Status of Savagery

From the Infancy of the Human Race to the commencement of the next Period.

II. Middle Status of Savagery

From the acquisition of a ﬁsh subsistence and a knowledge of the use of ﬁre . . .

III. Upper Status of Savagery

From the Invention of the Bow and Arrow . . .

IV. Lower Status of Barbarism From the Invention of the Art of Pottery . . .

V. Middle Status of Barbarism From the Domestication of animals on the Eastern hemisphere, and in the Western

from the cultivation of maize and plants by Irrigation . . .

VI. Upper Status of Barbarism From the Invention of the process of Smelting Iron Ore, with the use of iron tools . . .

VII. Civilization

From the Invention of writing, to the present time.

530

