periods. . . .  The far northern Indians and some of the
coast tribes of North and South America were in the
Upper Status of savagery; the partially Village Indians
east of the Mississippi were in the Lower Status of bar-
barism, and the Village Indians of North and South
America were in the Middle Status. . . .

Commencing, then, with the Australians and Poly-
nesians, following with the American Indian tribes, and
concluding with the Roman and Grecian, who afford
the highest exemplifications respectively of the six great
stages of human progress, the sum of their united experi-
ences may be supposed fairly to represent that of the
human family. . . . We are dealing substantially, with
the ancient history and condition of our own remote
ancestors.

3.  Touring Indian Country, 1888 and 1894. Hoping to
lure eastern tourists, the Northern Paciﬁc Railroad
published an annual journal, Wonderland, describ-
ing the natural splendors and economic progress of
the West, as seen from its rail lines.

We are now in the far-famed Yellowstone Valley. . . . There
are but few Indians now to be seen along the line of the
railroad, and those are engaged in agricultural and indus-
trial pursuits. The extinction of the buffalo has rendered
the Indian much more amenable to the civilizing influ-
ences brought to bear upon him than he formerly was,
and very fair crops of grain are being raised at some of the
agencies. At the Devil’s Lake agency, for example, 60,000
bushels of wheat have been raised by the [Sioux and
Chippewa] Indians in a single season. . . .

[The Crows’] great reservation is probably the garden

spot of Montana, and the throwing open of a large por-
tion of it to [white] settlement, which cannot long be
delayed, will assuredly give an immense impetus to the
agricultural interests of the Territory. . . .

The Flatheads have probably 10,000 or more horses
and 5,000 or 6,000 cattle. . . . As ranchers and farmers the

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Compare the depiction of the Plains Indians and Buffalo
Bill Cody in source 1. How does source 4 differ from
source 1? From Edward Curtis’s “In a Piegan Lodge” (p. 533),
in which all traces of modern life were erased? How might
these depictions of “actual life” have shaped their audi-
ence’s understanding of the West?

2.  What bases did Morgan use for his rankings in source 2?
How did he deﬁne the relationship between American
Indians and whites (whom he refers to, in this passage, as
“we”)? Why did he suggest that Indians offered a unique
opportunity for study?

3.  Imagine that you were a wealthy, well-educated tourist

preparing to travel west in 1900. Which of these documents
would you most likely have encountered in advance? How
might they have shaped your expectations and experiences?

Flatheads are a success. It would be a matter of surprise to
some people who think that the only good Indian is a
dead Indian, to see the way some of the women handle
sewing machines.

Sources: (2) Lewis H. Morgan, Ancient Society (New York: Henry Holt and Company,
1878), 12–13, 16–18; (3) John Hyde, Wonderland (St. Paul, 1888), 21, and 1894, 27.

4.  Gertrude Käsebier, photograph of Joe Black Fox,
1898. One of the ﬁrst women to become a pro-
fessional photographer, Käsebier here depicts Joe
Black Fox relaxing with a cigarette. Black Fox, an
Oglala Sioux, toured with Buffalo Bill’s Wild West
in 1900.

Photographic History Collection, National Museum of American
History, Smithsonian Institution 69.236.22, 2004-57801

4.  These documents had different creators: an artist, a

scholar, and two sets of entrepreneurs. What audiences
did they have in mind? How do you think this affected
their messages?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Many nineteenth-century commentators claimed that Ameri-
can Indians were “vanishing”: that is, they could not adapt to
modernity and would die out. This proved untrue, of course,
but the idea circulated widely. Which of these sources lend
support to the idea of the “vanishing Indian”? Which suggest
counter-stories of survival and endurance? Using these sources
and your knowledge of the period, analyze the myths and
realities of Native American life in the late nineteenth century.

531

