532

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

jealous of Senate privileges, passed a bill to abolish all
treaty  making  with  Indians.  The  Senate  agreed,  pro-
vided  that  existing  treaties  remained  in  force.  It  was
one  more  step  in  a  long,  torturous  erosion  of  native
rights.  Eventually,  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court  ruled  in
Lone  Wolf  v.  Hitchcock  (1903)  that  Congress  could
make  whatever  Indian  policies  it  chose,  ignoring  all
existing treaties. That same year, in Ex Parte Crow Dog,
the  Court  ruled  that  no  Indian  was  a  citizen  unless
Congress designated him so. Indians were henceforth
wards  of  the  government.  These  rulings  remained  in
force until the New Deal of the 1930s.

Breaking Up Tribal Lands  Reformers’ most sweep-
ing effort to assimilate Indians was the Dawes Severalty
Act  (1887),  the  dream  of  Senator  Henry  L.  Dawes  of
Massachusetts, a leader in the Indian Rights Asso cia-
tion. Dawes saw the reservation system as an ugly relic
of  the  past.  Through  severalty — division  of  tribal
lands — he  hoped  to  force  Indians  onto  individual
landholdings,  partitioning  reservations  into  home-
steads, just like those of white farmers. Supporters of
the plan believed that landownership would encourage
Indians to assimilate. It would lead, as Dawes wrote, to
“a  personal  sense  of  independence.”  Individual  prop-
erty, echoed another reformer, would make the Indian
man  “intelligently  selfish, . . . with  a  pocket  that  aches
to be filled with dollars! ”

The  Dawes  Act  was  a  disaster.  It  played  into  the
hands of whites who coveted Indian land and who per-
suaded the government to sell them land that was not
needed  for  individual  allotments.  In  this  and  other
ways, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) implemented
the law carelessly, to the outrage of Dawes. In Indian
Territory,  a  commission  seized  more  than  15  million
“surplus” acres from native tribes by 1894, opening the
way for whites to convert the last federal territory set
aside for native peoples into the state of Oklahoma. In
addition  to  catastrophic  losses  of  collectively  held
property, native peoples lost 66 percent of their indi-
vidually  allotted  lands  between  the  1880s  and  the
1930s, through fraud, BIA mismanagement, and pres-
sure to sell to whites.

The End of Armed Resistance
As the nation consolidated control of the West in the
1870s, Americans hoped that Grant’s peace policy was
solving  the  “Indian  problem.”  In  the  Southwest,  such
formidable peoples as the Kiowas and Comanches had
been  forced  onto  reservations.  The  Diné  or  Navajo
nation,  exiled  under  horrific  conditions  during  the

Civil War but permitted to reoccupy their traditional
land, gave up further military resistance. An outbreak
among  California’s  Modoc  people  in  1873 — again,
humiliating  to  the  army — was  at  last  subdued.  Only
Sitting Bull, a leader of the powerful Lakota Sioux on
the northern plains, openly refused to go to a reserva-
tion.  When  pressured  by  U.S.  troops,  he  repeatedly
crossed into Canada, where he told reporters that “the
life of white men is slavery. . . . I have seen nothing that
a  white  man  has,  houses  or  railways  or  clothing  or
food, that is as good as the right to move in open coun-
try and live in our own fashion.”

In  1874,  the  Lakotas  faced  direct  provocation.
Lieutenant Colonel George Armstrong Custer, a brash
self-promoter  who  had  graduated  last  in  his  class  at
West Point, led an expedition into South Dakota’s Black
Hills  and  loudly  proclaimed  the  discovery  of  gold.
Amid the severe depression of the 1870s, prospectors
rushed  in.  The  United  States,  wavering  on  its  1868
treaty, pressured Sioux leaders to sell the Black Hills.
The  chiefs  said  no.  Ignoring  this  answer,  the  govern-
ment  demanded  in  1876  that  all  Sioux  gather  at  the
federal  agencies.  The  policy  backfired:  not  only  did
Sitting Bull refuse to report, but other Sioux, Cheyennes,
and Arapahos slipped away from reservations to join
him.  Knowing  they  might  face  military  attack,  they
agreed to live together for the summer in one great vil-
lage numbering over seven thousand people. By June,
they were camped on the Little Big Horn River in what
is now southeastern Montana. Some of the young men
wanted  to  organize  raiding  parties,  but  elders  coun-
seled  against  it.  “We  [are]  within  our  treaty  rights  as
hunters,” they argued. “We must keep ourselves so.”

The U.S. Army dispatched a thousand cavalry and
infantrymen  to  drive  the  Indians  back  to  the  reser-
vation.  Despite  warnings  from  experienced  scouts —
including  Crow  Indian  allies — most  officers  thought
the  job  would  be  easy.  Their  greatest  fear  was  that
the Indians would manage to slip away. But amid the
nation’s  centennial  celebration  on  the  Fourth  of  July
1876, Americans received dreadful news. On June 26
and  27,  Lieutenant  Colonel  Custer,  leading  the  7th
Cavalry as part of a three-pronged effort to surround
the  Indians,  had  led  210  men  in  an  ill-considered
assault on Sitting Bull’s camp. The Sioux and their allies
had killed the attackers to the last man. “The Indians,”
one Oglala woman remembered, “acted just like they
were driving buffalo to a good place where they could
be easily slaughtered.”

As retold by the press in sensational (and often fic-
tionalized) accounts, the story of Custer’s “last stand”
quickly served to justify American conquest of Indian

