CHAPTER 16

  Conquering a Continent, 1854–1890

533

Little Plume and Yellow Kidney

Photographer Edward S. Curtis took this photograph of the Piegan (Blackfeet) leader Little Plume and his son
Yellow Kidney. Curtis’s extensive collection of photographs of Native Americans remains a valuable resource
for historians. However, Curtis altered his images to make his native subjects seem more “authentic”: though
Indians made widespread use of nonnative furniture, clothes, and other consumer goods (such as Singer
sewing machines), Curtis removed those from the frame. He also retouched photographs to remove items
such as belts and watches. Note the circular “shadow” here, against the lodge wall, near Little Plume’s right
arm: the original photograph included a clock. Library of Congress.

“savages.”  Long  after  Americans  forgot  the  massacres
of Cheyenne women and children at Sand Creek and of
Piegan people on the Marias River, prints of the Battle
of Little Big Horn hung in barrooms across the country.
William  F.  “Buffalo  Bill”  Cody,  in  his  traveling  Wild
West  performances,  enacted  a  revenge  killing  of  a
Cheyenne man named Yellow Hand in a tableau Cody
called “first scalp for Custer.” Notwithstanding that the
tableau  featured  a  white  man  scalping  a  Cheyenne,
Cody depicted it as a triumph for civilization.

Little Big Horn proved to be the last military vic-
tory of Plains Indians against the U.S. Army. Pursued
relentlessly after Custer’s death and finding fewer and
fewer  bison  to  sustain  them,  Sioux  parents  watched
their  children  starve  through  a  bitter  winter.  Slowly,
families trickled into the agencies and accommodated
themselves to reservation life (Map 16.6). The next year,

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did Grant’s peace
policy fail to consider the
needs of Native Americans
in the West, and what
were its results?

the  Nez  Perces,  fleeing  for  the
Canadian border, also surrendered.
The  final  holdouts  fought  in  the
Southwest with Chiricahua Apache
leader Geronimo. Like many oth-
ers,  Geronimo  had  accepted  res-
ervation life but found conditions
unendurable. Describing the des-
olate land the tribe had been allotted, one Apache said
it  had  “nothing  but  cactus,  rattlesnakes,  heat,  rocks,
and insects. . . . Many, many of our people died of star-
vation.” When Geronimo took up arms in protest, the
army  recruited  other  Apaches  to  track  him  and  his
band  into  the  hills;  in  September  1886,  he  surren-
dered for the last time. The Chiricahua Apaches never
returned  to  their  homeland.  The  United  States  had
completed its military conquest of the West.

