534

PART 5

  CREATING AND PRESERVING A CONTINENTAL NATION, 1844–1877

Standing Rock
Agency

1868

Cheyenne River
Agency

GREAT SIOUX
RESERVATION

Spotted Tail Agency

Red Cloud Agency

Missouri R.

Standing Rock
Agency

1877

Cheyenne River
Agency

GREAT SIOUX
RESERVATION

Pine Ridge
Agency

Rosebud
Agency

Missouri R.

1889

Standing Rock
Reservation

Cheyenne River
Reservation

Lower Brulé
Reservation

Sisseton
Reservation

Crow Creek
Reservation

Pine Ridge
Reservation

Rosebud
Reservation

(cid:8)

Wounded Knee

Yankton
Reservation
Missouri R.

Present-day state
boundaries are shown.

Santee
Reservation

MAP 16.6
The Sioux Reservations in South Dakota, 1868–1889

In 1868, when they bent to the demand that they
move onto the reservation, the Sioux thought they
had gained secure rights to a substantial part of their
ancestral hunting grounds. But harsh conditions on
reservations led to continuing military conﬂicts. Land-
hungry whites exerted continuous local pressure, and
ofﬁcials in Washington repeatedly changed the terms
of Sioux land holdings — always eroding native claims.

Strategies of Survival
Though the warpath closed, many native peoples con-
tinued  secretly  to  practice  traditional  customs.  Away
from  the  disapproving  eyes  of
agents  and  teachers,  they  passed
on their languages, histories, and
traditional  arts  and  medicine  to
younger  generations.  Frustrated
missionaries often concluded that
little  could  be  accomplished
because  bonds  of  kinship  and

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
In what ways did the
outlook of native peoples
change in the era after
armed resistance had
ended?

custom were so strong. Parents also hated to relinquish
their  children  to  off-reservation  boarding  schools.
Thus  more  and  more  Indian  schools  ended  up  on  or
near  reservations;  white  teachers  had  to  accept  their
pupils’  continued  participation  in  the  rhythms  of
Indian community life.

Selectively,  most  native  peoples  adopted  some
white  ways.  Many  parents  urged  their  sons  and
daughters  to  study  hard,  learn  English,  and  develop
skills  to  help  them  succeed  in  the  new  world  they
confronted. Even Sitting Bull announced in 1885 that
he wanted his children “to be educated like the white
children  are.”  Some  Indian  students  grew  up  to  be
lawyers,  doctors,  and  advocates  for  their  people,
including  writers  and  artists  who  interpreted  native
experiences for national audiences. One of the most
famous was a Santee Sioux boy named Ohiyesa, who
became  Dr.  Charles  Eastman.  Posted  to  the  Pine
Ridge  Reservation  in  South  Dakota,  Eastman  prac-
ticed  medicine  side  by  side  with  traditional  healers,
whom he respected, and wrote popular books under
his Sioux name. He remembered that when he left for
boarding  school,  his  father  had  said,  “We  have  now
entered  upon  this  life,  and  there  is  no  going
back. . . . Remember, my boy, it is the same as if I sent
you  on  your  first  war-path.  I  shall  expect  you  to
conquer.”

Nothing  exemplified  this  syncretism,  or  cultural
blending, better than the  Ghost  Dance  movement of
the late 1880s and early 1890s, which fostered native
peoples’ hope that they could, through sacred dances,
resurrect  the  bison  and  call  a  great  storm  to  drive
whites  back  across  the  Atlantic.  The  Ghost  Dance
drew  on  Christian  elements  as  well  as  native  ones.
As  the  movement  spread  from  reservation  to  reser-
vation — Paiutes,  Arapahos,  Sioux — native  peoples
developed  new  forms  of  pan-Indian  identity  and
cooperation.

White responses to the Ghost Dance showed con-
lethal  exertion  of
tinued  misunderstanding  and
authority.  In  1890,  when  a  group  of  Lakota  Sioux
Ghost  Dancers  left  their  South  Dakota  reservation,
they were pursued by the U.S. Army, who feared that
further spread of the religion would provoke war. On
December  29,  at  Wounded  Knee,  the  7th  Cavalry
caught  up  with  fleeing  Lakotas  and  killed  at  least
150 — perhaps as many as 300. Like other massacres,
this  one  could  have  been  avoided.  The  deaths  at
Wounded Knee stand as a final indictment of decades
of  relentless  U.S.  expansion,  white  ignorance  and
greed,  chaotic  and  conflicting  policies,  and  bloody
mistakes.

