CHAPTER 16

  Conquering a Continent, 1854–1890

535

Western Myths and Realities
The  post–Civil  War  frontier  produced  mythic  figures
who  have  played  starring  roles  in  America’s  national
folklore  ever  since:  “savage”  Indians,  brave  pioneers,
rugged  cowboys,  and  gun-slinging  sheriffs.  Far  from
being invented by Hollywood in the twentieth century,
these  oversimplified  characters  emerged  in  the  era
when  the  nation  incorporated  the  West.  Pioneers
helped  develop  the  mythic  ideal.  As  one  Montana
woman claimed, they had come west “at peril of their
lives” and faced down “scalp dances” and other terrors;
in the end, they “conquered the wilderness and trans-
formed it into a land of peace and plenty.” Some former
cowboys, capitalizing on the popularity of dime novel
Westerns,  spiced  up  their  memoirs  for  sale.  Eastern
readers were eager for stories like The Life and Adven-
tures of Nat Love (1907), written by a Texas cowhand
who had been born in slavery in Tennessee and who, as
a  rodeo  star  in  the  1870s,  had  won  the  nickname
“Deadwood Dick.”

No  myth-maker  proved  more  influential  than
Buffalo Bill  Cody.  Unlike  those  who  saw  the  West  as
free  or  empty,  Bill  understood  that  the  United  States
had taken it by conquest. Ironically, his famous Wild
West,  which  he  insisted  was  not  a  “show”  but  an
authentic  representation  of  frontier  experience,  pro-
vided  one  of  the  few  employment  options  for  Plains
Indians. To escape harsh reservation conditions, Sioux
and  Cheyenne  men  signed  on  with  Bill  and  demon-
strated their riding skills for cheering audiences across
the  United  States  and  Europe,  chasing  buffalo  and
attacking  U.S.  soldiers  and  pioneer  wagons  in  the
arena. Buffalo Bill proved to be a good employer. Black
Elk, a Sioux man who joined Cody’s operation, recalled
that  Bill  was  generous  and  “had  a  strong  heart.”  But
Black  Elk  had  a  mixed  reaction  to  the  Wild  West.  “I
liked the part of the show we made,” he told an inter-
viewer, “but not the part the Wasichus [white people]
made.” As he observed, the Wild West of the 1880s was
at its heart a celebration of U.S. military conquest.

At this same moment of transition, a young histo-
rian named Frederick Jackson Turner reviewed recent
census data and proclaimed the end of the frontier. Up
to 1890, he wrote, a clear, westward-moving line had
existed between “civilization and savagery.” The fron-
tier  experience,  Turner  argued,  shaped  Americans’
national character. It left them a heritage of “coarseness
and  strength,  combined  with  acuteness  and  inquisi-
tiveness,” as well as “restless, nervous energy.”

Today, historians reject Turner’s depiction of Indian
“savagery” — and  his  contradictory  idea  that  white

pioneers in the West claimed empty “free land.” Many
scholars  have  noted  that  frontier  conquest  was  both
violent and incomplete. The Dust Bowl of the 1930s, as
well  as  more  recent  cycles  of  drought,  have  repeated
late-nineteenth-century  patterns  of  hardship  and
depopulation  on  the  plains.  During  the  1950s  and
1960s, also, uranium mining rushes in the West mim-
icked earlier patterns of boom and bust, leaving ghost
towns in their wake. Turner himself acknowledged that
the frontier had both good and evil elements. He noted
that in the West, “frontier liberty was sometimes con-
fused with absence of all effective government.” But in
1893, when Turner first published “The Significance of
the Frontier in American History,” eager listeners heard
only the positives. They saw pioneering in the West as
evidence  of  American  exceptionalism:  of  the  nation’s
unique history and destiny. They claimed that “peace-
ful” American expansion was the opposite of European
empires — ignoring  the  many  military  and  economic
similarities.  Although  politically  the  Ameri can  West
became a set of states rather than a colony, historians
today emphasize the legacy of conquest that is central
to its (and America’s) history.

Less  than  two  months  after  the  massacre  at
Wounded Knee, General William T. Sherman died in
New  York.  As  the  nation  marked  his  passing  with
pomp and oratory, commentators noted that his career
reflected a great era of conquest and consolidation of
national power. Known primarily for his role in defeat-
ing  the  Confederacy,  Sherman’s  first  military  exploits
had  been  against  Seminoles  in  Florida.  Later,  during
the Mexican War (1846–1848), he had gone west with
the U.S. Army to help claim California. After the Civil
War, the general went west again, supervising the forced
removal of Sioux and Cheyennes to reservations.

When  Sherman  graduated  from  West  Point  in
1840, the United States had counted twenty-six states,
none of them west of Missouri. At  his death in 1891,
the nation boasted forty-four states, stretching to the
Pacific coast. The United States now rivaled Britain and
Germany as an industrial giant, and its dynamic econ-
omy was drawing immigrants from around the world.
Over  the  span  of  Sherman’s  career,  the  United  States
had become a major player on the world stage. It had
done  so  through  the  kind  of  fierce  military  conquest
that  Sherman  made  famous,  as  well  as  through  bold
expansions  of  federal  authority  to  foster  economic
expansion.  From  the  wars  and  policies  of  Sherman’s
lifetime, the children and grandchildren of Civil War
heroes inherited a vast empire. In the coming decades,
it would be up to them to decide how they would use
the nation’s new power.

