536

PART 5

  CHAPTER REVIEW

SUMMARY
Between 1861 and 1877, the United States completed
its  conquest  of  the  continent.  After  the  Civil  War,
expansion  of  railroads  fostered  integration  of  the
national economy. Republican policymakers promoted
this integration through protective tariffs, while federal
court rulings facilitated economic growth and strength-
ened corporations. To attract foreign investment, Con-
gress placed the nation on the gold standard. Federal
officials also pursued a vigorous foreign policy, acquir-
ing Alaska and asserting U.S. power indirectly through
control of international trade in Latin America and Asia.
An  important  result  of  economic  integration  was
incorporation of the Great Plains. Cattlemen built an
industry  linked  to  the  integrated  economy,  in  the
process  nearly  driving  the  native  bison  to  extinction.
Homesteaders confronted harsh environmental condi-
tions as they converted the grasslands for agriculture.
Republicans  championed  homesteader  families  as

representatives  of  domesticity,  an  ideal  opposed  to
Mormon  plural  marriage  in  Utah.  Homesteading
accelerated the rapid, often violent, transformation of
western environments. Perceiving this transformation,
federal  officials  began  setting  aside  natural  preserves
such  as  Yellowstone,  often  clashing  with  Native
Americans who wished to hunt there.

Conflicts  led  to  the  dispossession  of  Native
American lands. During the Civil War, whites clashed
with  the  Sioux  and  their  allies.  Grant’s  peace  policy
sought to end this conflict by forcing Native Americans
to  acculturate  to  European-style  practices.  Indian
armed resistance continued through the 1880s, ending
with Geronimo’s surrender in 1886. Thereafter, Native
Americans survived by secretly continuing their tradi-
tions and selectively adopting white ways. Due in part
to  the  determined  military  conquest  of  this  period,
the  United  States  claimed  a  major  role  on  the  world
stage.  Frontier  myths  shaped  Americans’  view  of
themselves  as  rugged  individualists  with  a  unique
national destiny.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

transcontinental railroad (p. 508)
protective tariff (p. 510)
Treaty of Kanagawa (p. 510)
Burlingame Treaty (p. 511)
Munn v. Illinois (p. 514)
gold standard (p. 515)
Crime of 1873 (p. 515)
Homestead Act (p. 516)
Morrill Act (p. 516)
land-grant colleges (p. 516)
Comstock Lode (p. 516)
Long Drive (p. 519)
“rain follows the plow” (p. 519)

Exodusters (p. 520)
Yellowstone National Park

(p. 525)

U.S. Fisheries Commission

(p. 525)

Sand Creek massacre (p. 527)
Fetterman massacre (p. 528)
Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock (p. 532)
Dawes Severalty Act (p. 532)
Battle of Little Big Horn (p. 533)
Ghost Dance movement (p. 534)
Wounded Knee (p. 534)

Key People

William Seward (p. 510)
Emmeline Wells (p. 521)
John Wesley Powell (p. 521)
Chief Joseph (p. 525)
Sitting Bull (p. 532)
George Armstrong Custer

(p. 532)

Geronimo (p. 533)
Ohiyesa (Dr. Charles Eastman)

(p. 534)

Buffalo Bill Cody (p. 535)
Frederick Jackson Turner (p. 535)

