CHAPTER 16

  CHAPTER REVIEW

537

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  What  national  policies  did  Republicans  pursue
during the Civil War and Reconstruction to stimu-
late economic growth and consolidate a continen-
tal empire? What were the resulting achievements
and costs?

2.  How  did  the  trans-Mississippi  west  develop  eco-
nomically in this era? What problems and conflicts
resulted?

3.  Why did U.S. policies toward Native Americans in
this era result in so much violence? Why did armed

struggle  continue  as  late  as  1890,  despite  the  U.S.
“peace policy” that was proclaimed in the 1870s?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events  listed  under  “Peopling”  on  the  thematic
timeline on page 409. Between the 1840s and the
1870s, what distinctive patterns of racial and ethnic
conflict occurred along the northeastern seaboard
and in the West? What were the results for immi-
grants  in  the  Northeast,  and  for  different  ethnic
and racial groups in the West?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  During  the
Reconstruction  years,  Republican  policymakers
made  sweeping  policy  decisions — especially  hav-
ing to do with land rights, voting rights, and educa-
tion — that shaped the future of African Americans
in the South and American Indians in the West. In
an  essay,  compare  U.S.  policies  toward  the  two
groups. What assumptions and goals underlay each
effort  to  incorporate  racial  minorities  into  the
United States? To what extent did each effort suc-
ceed or fail, and why? How did the actions of pow-
erful whites in each region shape the results?

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  Review the images in this
chapter. Find two that show how Americans of the
era  thought  the  landscapes  of  the  West  ought  to
look  when  settlement  was  complete.  Identify  at
least  three  others  that  show  what  the  natural  and
built environments of the West really looked like.
What do you conclude from this comparison about
the ambitions and limits of westward expansion?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

David Wallace Adams, Education for Extinction
(1995). A powerful history of American Indian
boarding schools.

American Experience (PBS), “Last Stand at Little Big
Horn.” A nuanced one-hour documentary about the
famous battle.

Sarah Barringer Gordon, The Mormon Question
(2002). An exploration of plural marriage debates in
national politics.

Joy S. Kasson, Buffalo Bill’s Wild West (2001). A
wonderful study of Buffalo Bill’s performances and
their role in shaping mythologies of the West.

Patricia Nelson Limerick, The Legacy of Conquest
(1987) and Something in the Soil (2000). Limerick’s
lively, accessible books are an excellent introduction to
historians’ recent rethinking of western history.

María Montoya, Translating Property (2002). Tells the
story of the displacement of Mexican Americans (and
their neighbors) in struggles over the Maxwell Land
Grant in New Mexico and Colorado.

