6P A R T

C H A P T E R 17
Industrial America:
Corporations and
Conflicts, 1877–1911

C H A P T E R 18
The Victorians
Make the Modern,
1880–1917

C H A P T E R 19
“Civilization’s
Inferno”: The Rise and
Reform of Industrial
Cities, 1880–1917

C H A P T E R 20
Whose Government?
Politics, Populists,
and Progressives,
1880–1917

540

Industrializing
America: Upheavals
and Experiments
1877–1917

Touring  the  United  States  around  1900,  a  Hungarian  Catholic  abbot

named Count Péter Vay visited the steel mills of Pittsburgh. “Fourteen-

thousand  tall  chimneys . . . discharge  their  burning  sparks  and  smoke

incessantly,” he reported. He was moved by the plight of fellow Hungari-

ans, laboring “wherever the heat is most insupportable, the flames most

scorching.” One worker had just been killed in a foundry accident. Vay,

attending the funeral, worried that immigration was “of no use except to

help fill the moneybags of the insatiable millionaires.”

Vay witnessed America’s emergence as an industrial power — and the

consequences of that transformation. In 1877, the United States was over-

whelmingly  rural  and  dependent  on  foreign  capital.  By  1917,  its  land-

scapes, population, and ways of life were forever altered. Industrialization

brought millions of immigrants from around the globe and built immense

cities  whose  governance  and  social  relations  offered  unaccustomed

rewards and challenges. It sharpened class divisions and led to the rise of

national labor movements, while prompting Americans to redefine men’s

and  women’s  roles.  Industrialization  also  created  pressure  for  political

innovation. As ex-president Theodore Roosevelt declared in 1910, Amer-

ican citizens needed to “control the mighty commercial forces which they

have called into being.” Workers, farmers, and urban reformers sought to

regulate corporations, fight poverty, and clean up politics and the envi-

ronment. In their creative responses to the problems of the industrial age,

such reformers gave their name to the Progressive Era.

