Corporations and Conflicts

A Diverse, Urban Society

In the post–Civil War decades, giant corporations
developed national and even global networks of
production, marketing, and ﬁnance. In many ﬁelds,
vertical integration enabled corporate managers to
control production from the harvesting of raw materi-
als through the sale of ﬁnished products. Nationwide
marketing networks developed through innovative use
of railroads — and through ruthless competitive tactics
such as predatory pricing.

Corporations’ complex structures opened career

opportunities for middle managers and salesmen.
Women, ﬁlling new niches as telephone operators
and department store clerks, also played an important
role in the expanding service sector. At the same time,
traditional craftsmen found themselves displaced as
deskilled wage work steadily expanded. Factory
workers and miners endured dangerous condi tions,
health haz ards, low pay, and frequent bouts of
unemployment.

The most dangerous, low-wage work was often
allotted to African Americans and immigrants from
Europe, Mexico, and Asia. Workers organized to
protest these conditions. In addition to creating
labor unions, they forged political alliances with
farmers, who also found their livelihoods at risk
in the changing global economy. Native-born work-
ers and European immigrants successfully agitated
for the legal exclusion of Chinese workers. These
events are covered in Chapter 17.

While the old values of thrift, piety, and domesticity
never entirely faded, they faced challenges in the era
of industrialization. Women asserted more indepen-
dent roles in public life. The new model for men was
an aggressive masculinity, embodied in the rise of
sports. Widespread acceptance of Charles Darwin’s
theory of evolution prompted inﬂuential thinkers to
justify economic inequality as a law of nature. In
culture, the rise of literary realism and abstract art
marked decisive innovations. Responding to these
upheavals, people of religious faith reshaped their
institutions. Some accepted modernity, while others
called for a return to Christian “fundamentals.” See
Chapter 18 for these developments.

Great cities arose, becoming playgrounds for the

new superrich while also housing millions of poor
immigrants in tenements. At the same time, people
of all classes in the vibrant cities enjoyed new plea-
sures, from amusement parks to vaudeville and
movies. The fast-growing cities proved challenging
to govern. To the frustration of middle-class reform-
ers, many immigrant voters supported political
machines like New York’s Tammany Hall. By 1900,
though, even some machine leaders admitted the
need for reform, and big cities began to serve as
seedbeds for progressive experiments. On these
developments, see Chapters 18 and 19.

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

541

