Industrializing
America: Upheavals
and Experiments
1877–1917

Reform Initiatives

Thematic Understanding

This timeline arranges some of the important

events of this period into themes. What was

the relationship of the two severe economic

depressions listed under “Work, Exchange,

and Technology” to political reform? Did

reform tend to come during or after periods

of economic crisis? Why do you think this

was the case? In what ways did Americans

respond politically to the depression of the

1870s? What continuities and changes do

you see in their responses to the next severe

depression, in the 1890s?  >

Political debates in this era centered on the scope of
government power, as reformers called for regulation
of corporations and other measures to blunt the
impact of industrialization. After the 1880s, Repub-
licans increasingly defended big business. Though
Republican Theodore Roosevelt championed land-
mark legislation during his presidency (1901–1909),
much reform energy passed to other parties. Demo-
crats, who had long called for limited government,
began to advocate stronger federal intervention to
ﬁght poverty and restrain big business. By the 1910s,
during the presidency of Democrat Woodrow Wilson
(1913–1921), the party enacted an impressive slate
of laws. Meanwhile, the Populist, Socialist, and Pro-
gressive parties proposed more radical responses to
industrialization and concentrated wealth. While none
of these parties won national power, their ideas helped
shape the course of reform.

Progressive Era reformers — a diverse group who
were not at all united — sought to enhance democracy,
rein in the power of corporations, uphold labor rights,
protect the environment, and promote public health
and safety. They faced formidable obstacles, especially
from Supreme Court rulings. Nonetheless, by 1917,
national, state, and local governments enacted a range
of new laws, representing the early emergence of the
modern state. Chapter 20 traces these events.

542

