546

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

The Rise of Big Business
In  the  late  1800s,  industrialization  in  Europe  and
the  United  States  revolutionized  the  world  economy.
large-scale  commercial  agriculture  to
It  brought
many  parts  of  the  globe  and  prompted  millions  of
migrants — both  skilled  workers  and  displaced  peas-
ants — to cross continents and oceans in search of jobs.
Industrialization  also  created  a  production  glut.  The
immense  scale  of  agriculture  and  manufacturing
caused  a  long  era  of  deflation,  when  prices  dropped
worldwide (Figure 17.1).

Falling  prices  normally  signal  low  demand  for
goods  and  services,  and  thus  stagnation.  In  England,
a mature industrial power, the late nineteenth century
did bring economic decline. But in the United States,
production expanded. Between 1877 and 1900, Ameri-
cans’ average real income increased from $388 to $573
per  capita.  In  this  sense,  Andrew  Carnegie  was  right
when  he  argued  that,  even  though  industrialization
increased  the  gap  between  rich  and  poor,  everyone’s
standard  of  living  rose.  In  his  famous  1889  essay
“Wealth” — later  called  “The  Gospel  of  Wea lth” — he
observed that “the poor enjoy what the rich could not
before afford. What were the luxuries have become the
necessaries of life.”

To see a longer excerpt of “The Gospel of Wealth,”
along with other primary sources from this period,
see Sources for America’s History.

Technological  and  business  efficiencies  allowed
American firms to grow, invest in new equipment, and
earn  profits  even  as  prices  for  their  products  fell.
Growth  depended,  in  turn,  on  America’s  large  and

growing population, expansion into the West, and an
integrated national marketplace. In many fields, large
corporations became the dominant form of business.

Innovators in Enterprise
As rail lines stretched westward between the 1850s and
1880s,  operators  faced  a  crisis.  As  one  Erie  Railroad
executive  noted,  a  superintendent  on  a  50-mile  line
could personally attend to every detail. But supervising
a 500-mile line was impossible; trains ran late, commu-
nications failed, and trains crashed. Managers gradu-
ally  invented  systems  to  solve  these  problems.  They
distinguished top executives from those responsible for
day-to-day operations. They departmentalized opera-
tions  by  function — purchasing,  machinery,  freight
traffic, passenger traffic — and established clear lines of
communication.  They  perfected  cost  accounting,
which  allowed  an  industrialist  like  Carnegie  to  track
expenses  and  revenues  carefully  and  thus  follow  his
Scottish mother’s advice: “Take care of the pennies, and
the pounds will take care of themselves.” This manage-
ment revolution created the internal structure adopted
by many large, complex corporations.

During these same years, the United States became
an  industrial  power  by  tapping  North  America’s  vast
natural resources, particularly in the West. Industries
that had once depended on water power began to use
prodigious  amounts  of  coal.  Steam  engines  replaced
human and animal labor, and kerosene replaced whale
oil and wood. By 1900, America’s factories and urban
homes  were  converting  to  electric  power.  With  new
management structures and dependency on fossil fuels
(oil, coal, natural gas), corporations transformed both
the  economy  and  the  country’s  natural  and  built
environments.

FIGURE 17.1
Business Activity and Wholesale Prices, 1869–1900

This graph shows the key feature of the performance of the
late-nineteenth-century economy: while output was boom-
ing, wholesale prices were, on the whole, falling. Thus, while
workers often struggled with falling wages — especially dur ing
decades of severe economic crisis — consumer products also
became cheaper to buy.

100

0
0
1
=
9
2
9
1
–
6
2
9
1

80

60

40

20

0

Wholesale prices

GDP*

1869

1875

1880

1885

1890

1895

1900

*Gross domestic product

