CHAPTER 17

  Industrial America: Corporations and Conflicts, 1877–1911

547

Big  packers

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Why did large corpora-
tions arise in the late
nineteenth century, and
how did leading indus-
trialists consolidate their
power?

invented  new
sales tactics. For example, Swift &
Company  periodically  slashed
prices in certain markets to below
production  costs,  driving  inde-
pendent  distributors  to  the  wall.
With  profits  from  its  sales  else-
where,  a  large  firm  like  Swift
could  survive  temporary  losses  in  one  locality  until
competitors went under. Afterward, Swift could raise
prices again. This technique, known as predatory pric-
ing,  helped  give  a  few  firms  unprecedented  market
control.

Standard Oil and the Rise of the Trusts  No one
used ruthless business tactics more skillfully than the
king of petroleum, John D. Rockefeller. After inventors
in  the  1850s  figured  out  how  to  extract  kerosene — a
clean-burning  fuel  for  domestic  heating  and  light-
ing — from crude oil, enormous oil deposits were dis-
covered at Titusville, Pennsylvania. Just then, the Civil
War  severely  disrupted  whaling,  forcing  whale-oil
customers  to  look  for  alternative  lighting  sources.
Overnight,  a  forest  of  oil  wells  sprang  up  around
Titusville.  Connected  to  these  Pennsylvania  oil  fields
by  rail  in  1863,  Cleveland,  Ohio,  became  a  refining

Production and Sales  After Chicago’s Union Stock
Yards opened in 1865, middlemen shipped cows by rail
from  the  Great  Plains  to  Chicago  and  from  there  to
eastern  cities,  where  slaughter  took  place  in  local
butchertowns.  Such  a  system — a  national  livestock
market with local processing — could have lasted, as it
did in Europe. But Gustavus Swift, a shrewd Chicago
cattle dealer, saw that local slaughterhouses lacked the
scale to utilize waste by-products and cut labor costs.
To improve productivity, Swift invented the assembly
line, where each wageworker repeated the same slaugh-
tering task over and over.

Swift also pioneered  vertical  integration, a model
in which a company controlled all aspects of produc-
tion  from  raw  materials  to  finished  goods.  Once  his
engineers designed a cooling system, Swift invested in
a fleet of refrigerator cars to keep beef fresh as he shipped
it  eastward,  priced  below  what  local  butchers  could
afford.  In  cities  that  received  his  chilled  meat,  Swift
built branch houses and fleets of delivery wagons. He
also constructed factories to make fertilizer and chem-
icals from the by-products of slaughter, and he devel-
oped  marketing  strategies  for  those  products  as  well.
Other Chicago packers followed Swift’s lead. By 1900,
five  firms,  all  vertically  integrated,  produced  nearly
90 percent of the meat shipped in interstate commerce.

Swift & Co.’s Packing House, Chicago,
c. 1906

This photograph shows the processing system
that enabled Swift and other large packers to
save money through high volume and deskilled
labor. The overhead pulley system shown in
the upper right moved carcasses from place to
place for completion of different tasks. Auto
manufacturer Henry Ford, who won fame for
his moving assembly line, claimed he got the
idea after visiting a meat-packing plant such
as this. Library of Congress.

