548

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

center. John D. Rockefeller was then an up-and-coming
Cleveland  grain  dealer.  (He,  like  Carnegie  and  most
other budding tycoons, hired a substitute to fight for
him in the Civil War.) Rockefeller had strong nerves, a
sharp eye for able partners, and a genius for finance. He
went into the kerosene business and borrowed heavily
to expand. Within a few years, his firm — Standard Oil
of Ohio — was Cleveland’s leading refiner.

Like  Carnegie  and  Swift,  Rockefeller  succeeded
through vertical integration: to control production and
sales all the way from the oil well to the kerosene lamp,
he took a big stake in the oil fields, added pipelines, and
developed  a  vast  distribution  network.  Rockefeller
allied with railroad executives, who, like him, hated the
oil market’s boom-and-bust cycles. What they wanted
was predictable, high-volume traffic, and they offered
Rockefeller  secret  rebates  that  gave  him  a  leg  up  on
competitors.

Rockefeller  also  pioneered  a  strategy  called  hori-
zontal  integration.  After  driving  competitors  to  the
brink of failure through predatory pricing, he invited
them to merge their local companies into his conglom-
erate. Most agreed, often because they had no choice.
Through such mergers, Standard Oil wrested control of
95  percent  of  the  nation’s  oil  refining  capacity  by  the
1880s.  In  1882,  Rockefeller’s  lawyers  created  a  new
legal form, the trust. It organized a small group of asso-
ciates — the  board  of  trustees — to  hold  stock  from  a
group of combined firms, managing them as a single
entity. Rockefeller soon invested in Mexican oil fields
and  competed  in  world  markets  against  Russian  and
Middle Eastern producers.

Other companies followed Rockefeller’s lead, creat-
ing  trusts  to  produce  such  products  as  linseed  oil,
sugar, and salt. Many expanded sales and production
overseas.  As  early  as  1868,  Singer  Manufacturing
Company established a factory in Scotland to produce
sewing machines. By World War I, such brands as Ford
and General Electric had become familiar around the
world.

Distressed by the development of near monopolies,
reformers began to denounce “the trusts,” a term that
in popular usage referred to any large corporation that
seemed to wield excessive power. Some states outlawed
trusts as a legal form. But in an effort to attract corpo-
rate headquarters to its state, New Jersey broke ranks in
1889, passing a law that permitted the creation of hold-
ing companies and other combinations. Delaware soon
followed,  providing  another  legal  haven  for  consoli-
dated corporations. A wave of mergers further concen-
trated  corporate  power  during  the  depression  of  the
1890s, as weaker firms succumbed to powerful rivals.

By  1900,  America’s  largest  one  hundred  companies
controlled  a  third  of  the  nation’s  productive  capacity.
Purchasing several steel companies in 1901, including
Carnegie  Steel,  J.  P.  Morgan  created  U.S.  Steel,  the
nation’s  first  billion-dollar  corporation.  Such  familiar
firms as DuPont and Eastman Kodak assumed domi-
nant places in their respective industries.

Assessing the Industrialists  The work of men like
Swift,  Rockefeller,  and  Carnegie  was  controversial  in
their lifetimes and has been ever since. Opinions have
tended to be harsh in eras of economic crisis, when the
shortcomings  of  corporate  America  appear  in  stark
relief. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, a his-
torian  coined  the  term  robber  barons,  which  is  still
used today. In periods of prosperity, both scholars and
the public have tended to view early industrialists more
favorably, calling them industrial statesmen.

Some  historians  have  argued  that  industrialists
benefitted the economy by replacing the chaos of mar-
ket competition with a “visible hand” of planning and
expert management. But one recent study of railroads
asserts  that  the  main  skills  of  early  tycoons  (as  well
as  those  of  today) were  cultivating  political  “friends,”
defaulting on loans, and lying to the public. Whether
we consider the industrialists heroes, villains, or some-
thing in between, it is clear that the corporate economy
was not the creation of just a few individuals, however
famous or influential. It was a systemic transformation
of the economy.

A National Consumer Culture  As they integrated
vertically and horizontally, corporations innovated in
other  ways.  Companies  such  as  Bell  Telephone  and
Westinghouse set up research laboratories. Steelmakers
invested  in  chemistry  and  materials  science  to  make
their products cheaper, better, and stronger. Mass mar-
kets brought an appealing array of goods to consumers
who  could  afford  them.  Railroads  whisked  Florida
oranges and other fresh produce to the shelves of gro-
cery stores. Retailers such as F. W. Woolworth and the
Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company (A&P) opened
chains of stores that soon stretched nationwide.

The  department  store  was  pioneered  in  1875  by
John  Wanamaker  in  Philadelphia.  These  megastores
displaced small retail shops, tempting customers with
large  show  windows  and  Christmas  displays.  Like
industrialists,  department  store  magnates  developed
economies of scale that enabled them to slash prices.
An 1898 newspaper advertisement for Macy’s Depart-
ment Store urged shoppers to “read our books, cook in
our saucepans, dine off our china, wear our silks, get

