CHAPTER 17

  Industrial America: Corporations and Conflicts, 1877–1911

549

The  active  shaping  of  consumer  demand  became,
in  itself,  a  new  enterprise.  Outdoors,  advertisements
appeared everywhere: in New York’s Madison Square,
the Heinz Company installed a 45-foot pickle made of
green  electric  lights.  Tourists  had  difficulty  admiring
Niagara Falls because billboards obscured the view. By
1900, companies were spending more than $90 million
a year ($2.3 billion today) on print advertising, as the
press  itself  became  a  mass-market  industry.  Rather
than charging subscribers the cost of production, mag-
azines began to cover their costs by selling ads. Cheap
subscriptions  built  a  mass  readership,  which  in  turn
attracted more advertisers. In 1903, the Ladies’ Home
Journal  became  the  first  magazine  with  a  million
subscribers.

The Corporate Workplace
Before the Civil War, most American boys had hoped to
become farmers, small-business owners, or independent
artisans. Afterward, more and more Ameri cans — both
male  and  female — began  working  for  someone  else.
Because  they  wore  white  shirts  with  starched  collars,
those  who  held  professional  positions  in  corporations
became known as white-collar workers, a term differen-
tiating  them  from  blue-collar  employees,  who  labored
with their hands. For a range of employees — managers
and laborers, clerks and salespeople — the rise of corpo-
rate work had wide-ranging consequences.

Managers and Salesmen  As the managerial revo-
lution  unfolded,  the  headquarters  of  major  corpora-
tions  began  to  house  departments  handling  specific
activities such as  purchasing and
accounting.  These  departments
were supervised by middle man-
agers, something not seen before
in  American  industry.  Middle
managers  took  on  entirely  new
tasks, directing the flow of goods,
labor,  and  information  through-
out the enterprise. They were key
innovators,  counterparts  to  the
engineers in research laboratories
who, in the same decades, worked to reduce costs and
improve efficiency.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What opportunities did
the rise of corporations
offer to different types of
“middle workers” — those
who were neither top
executives nor blue-collar
laborers?

Corporations also needed a new kind of sales force.
In post–Civil War America, the drummer, or traveling
salesman,  became  a  familiar  sight  on  city  streets  and
in  remote  country  stores.  Riding  rail  networks  from
town  to  town,  drummers  introduced  merchants  to
new  products,  offered  incentives,  and  suggested  sales

Thomas Edison

The wondrous inventions that emerged from Edison’s
laboratory in Menlo Park, New Jersey, ranged from the
phonograph shown here to electric light bulbs, moving
pictures, and Portland cement. Edison (1847–1931)
became a national hero — and the holder of over one
thousand patents. He was also a shrewd entrepreneur
who artfully cultivated both publicity and investor sup-
port. In demonstrating electric lights, he chose ﬁrst to
illuminate the headquarters of the New York Times and
the nearby ofﬁces of powerful ﬁnancier J. P. Morgan. In
this advertisement he makes a democratic appeal to all
Americans — but only the afﬂuent could afford a phono-
graph, which cost about $20. Dennis Nyhagen, The Digital Deli
Online, www.digitaldeliftp.com.

under  our  blankets,  smoke  our  cigars,  drink  our
wines — Shop at Macy’s — and Life will Cost You Less
and Yield You More Than You Dreamed Possible.”

While  department  stores  became  urban  fixtures,
Montgomery Ward and Sears built mail-order empires.
Rural families from Vermont to California pored over
the  companies’  annual  catalogs,  making  wish  lists  of
tools, clothes, furniture, and toys. Mail-order compa-
nies  used  money-back  guarantees  to  coax  wary  cus-
tomers  to  buy  products  they  could  not  see  or  touch.
“Don’t be afraid to make a mistake,” the Sears catalog
counseled. “Tell us what you want, in your own way.”
By 1900, America counted more than twelve hundred
mail-order companies.

