550

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

too little were singled out for remedial training or dis-
missal. Executives embraced the ideas of business psy-
chologist Walter Dill Scott, who published The Psychol-
ogy  of  Advertising  in  1908.  Scott’s  principles — which
included selling to customers based on their presumed
“instinct  of  escape”  and  “instinct  of  combat” — were
soon  taught  at  Harvard  Business  School.  Others  also
promised  that  a  “scientific  attitude”  would  “attract
attention” and “create desire.”

Women in the Corporate Office  Beneath the ranks
of managers emerged a new class of female office work-
ers. Before the Civil War, most clerks at small firms had
been  young  men  who  expected  to  rise  through  the
ranks. In a large corporation, secretarial work became
a  dead-end  job,  and  employers  began  assigning  it  to
women. By the turn of the twentieth century, 77 per-
cent  of  all  stenographers  and  typists  were  female;  by
1920, women held half of all low-level office jobs.

For  white  working-class  women,  clerking  and
office  work  represented  new  opportunities.  In  an  era
before  most  families  had  access  to  day  care,  mothers
most often earned money at  home, where they could
tend children while also taking in laundry, caring for
boarders, or doing piecework (sewing or other assem-
bly  projects,  paid  on  a  per-item  basis).  Unmarried
daughters  could  enter  domestic  service  or  factory
work,  but  clerking  and  secretarial  work  were  cleaner
and better paid.

New technologies provide additional opportunities
for  women.  The  rise  of  the  telephone,  introduced  by
inventor Alexander Graham Bell in 1876, was a notable
example. Originally intended for business use on local
exchanges,  telephones  were  eagerly  adopted  by  resi-
dential customers. Thousands of young women found
work as telephone operators. By 1900, more than four
million  women  worked  for  wages.  About  a  third
worked in domestic service; another third in industry;
the rest in office work, teaching, nursing, or sales. As
new occupations arose, the percentage of wage-earning
women  in  domestic  service  dropped  dramatically,  a
trend that continued in the twentieth century.

On the Shop Floor
Despite  the  managerial  revolution  at  the  top,  skilled
craft  workers — almost  all  of  them  men — retained
considerable  autonomy  in  many  industries.  A  coal
miner, for example, was not an hourly wageworker but
essentially  an  independent  contractor,  paid  by  the
amount  of  coal  he  produced.  He  provided  his  own
tools, worked at his own pace, and knocked off early

The Salesman as Professional, 1906

Salesmanship magazine featured this image in its June
1906 issue, depicting the traveling salesman as an energetic,
well-dressed professional. The advertisement urges salesmen
to join the United Commercial Travelers of America (UCTA), a
fraternal organization founded by salesmen in 1888 (and still
in existence today). UCTA offered its members the opportu-
nity to purchase insurance and build business networks with
fellow salesmen. Through such organizations, white-collar
workers and managers (who were almost never unionized)
banded together to pursue their common interests and
express professional pride. Salesmanship, June 1906,
Columbus Ohio.

displays. They built nationwide distribution networks
for such popular consumer products as cigarettes and
Coca-Cola. By the late 1880s, the leading manufacturer
of cash registers produced a sales script for its employ-
ees’  conversations  with  local  merchants.  “Take  for
granted  that  he  will  buy,”  the  script  directed.  “Say  to
him, ‘Now, Mr. Blank, what color shall I make it?’ . . .
Handing him your pen say, ‘Just sign here where I have
made the cross.’ ”

With such companies in the vanguard, sales became
systematized. Managers set individual sales quotas and
awarded prizes to top salesmen, while those who sold

