CHAPTER 17

  Industrial America: Corporations and Conflicts, 1877–1911

551

Telephone Operators, 1888

Like other women ofﬁce workers, these switchboard
operators enjoyed relatively high pay and comfortable
working conditions — especially in the early years of
the telephone industry, before operators’ work routines
speeded up. These young women worked for the
Central Union Telephone Company in Canton, Ohio.
Ohio Historical Society.

when  he  chose.  The  same  was  true  for  puddlers  and
rollers  in  iron  works;  molders  in  stove  making;  and
machinists, glass blowers, and skilled workers in many
other  industries.  Such  workers  abided  by  the  stint,  a
self-imposed limit on how much they would produce
each  day.  This  informal  system  of  restricting  output
infuriated  efficiency-minded  engineers,  but  to  the
workers  it  signified  personal  dignity,  manly  pride,
and brotherhood with fellow employees. One shop in
Lowell, Massachusetts, posted regulations requiring all
employees to be at their posts by the time of the open-
ing bell and to remain, with the shop door locked, until
the closing bell. A machinist promptly packed his tools,
declaring that he had not “been brought up under such
a system of slavery.”

Skilled  workers — craftsmen,  inside  contractors,
and  foremen — enjoyed  a  high  degree  of  autonomy.
But  those  who  paid  helpers  from  their  own  pocket
could also exploit them. Subcontracting arose, in part,
to  enable  manufacturers  to  distance  themselves  from
the consequences of shady labor practices. In Pittsburgh

steel mills, foremen were known as “pushers,” notori-
ous  for  driving  their  gangs  mercilessly.  On  the  other
hand,  industrial  labor  operated  on  a  human  scale,
through personal relationships that could be close and
enduring.  Striking  craft  workers  would  commonly
receive the support of helpers and laborers, and labor
gangs would sometimes walk out on behalf of a popu-
lar foreman.

As  industrialization  advanced,  however,  workers
increasingly  lost  the  independence  characteristic  of
craft work. The most important cause of this was the
deskilling of labor under a new system of mechanized
manufacturing  that  men  like  meat-packer  Gustavus
Swift had pioneered, and that automobile maker Henry
Ford  would  soon  call  mass  pro-
duction.  Everything  from  type-
writers  to  automobiles  came  to
be  assembled  from  standardized
parts, using machines that increas-
ingly  operated  with  little  human
oversight.  A  machinist  protested

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did conditions
change for industrial
workers in the late nine-
teenth century, and why?

