552

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

Ironworkers — Noontime, 1880

The ideal qualities of the nineteenth-century craft worker — dignity, brotherhood, manliness — shine through
in this painting by Thomas P. Anschutz. Ironworkers — Noontime became a popular painting after it was
reproduced as an engraving in Harper’s Weekly in 1884. Fine Arts Museum of San Francisco.

in 1883 that the sewing machine industry was so “sub-
divided” that “one man may make just a particular part
of  a  machine  and  may  not  know  anything  whatever
about  another  part  of  the  same  machine.”  Such  a
worker, noted an observer, “cannot be master of a craft,
but only master of a fragment.” Employers, who origi-
nally favored automatic machinery because it increased
output, quickly found that it also helped them control
workers and cut labor costs. They could pay unskilled
workers less and replace them easily.

By the early twentieth century, managers sought to
further  reduce  costs  through  a  program  of  industrial
efficiency called scientific management. Its inventor, a
metal-cutting expert named Frederick W. Taylor, rec-
ommended  that  employers  eliminate  all  brain  work
from manual labor, hiring experts to develop rules for
the shop floor. Workers must be required to “do what
they are told promptly and without asking questions or
making suggestions.” In its most extreme form, scien-
tific management called for engineers to time each task
with a stopwatch; companies would pay workers more
if  they  met  the  stopwatch  standard.  Taylor  assumed

that workers would respond automatically to the lure
of higher earnings. But scientific management was not,
in  practice,  a  great  success.  Implementing  it  proved
to be expensive, and workers stubbornly resisted. Cor-
porate managers, however, adopted bits and pieces of
Taylor’s  system,  and  they  enthusiastically  agreed  that
decisions  should  lie  with  “management  alone.”  Over
time,  in  comparison  with  businesses  in  other  coun-
tries,  American  corporations  created  a  particularly
wide gap between the roles of managers and those of
the blue-collar workforce.

Blue-collar workers had little freedom to negotiate,
and their working conditions deteriorated markedly as
mass production took hold. At the same time, industri-
alization brought cheaper products that enabled many
Americans to enjoy new consumer products — if they
could  avoid  starvation.  From  executives  down  to
unskilled workers, the hierarchy of corporate employ-
ment contributed to sharper distinctions among three
economic classes: the wealthy elite; an emerging, self-
defined “middle class”; and a struggling class of work-
ers,  who  bore  the  brunt  of  the  economy’s  new  risks

