CHAPTER 17

  Industrial America: Corporations and Conflicts, 1877–1911

553

The Singer Sewing Machine

The sewing machine was an American invention that swiftly found markets abroad. The Singer Manufactur-
ing Company, the dominant ﬁrm by the time the Civil War began, exported sewing machines to markets as
far-ﬂung as Ireland, Russia, China, and India. The company also moved some manufacturing operations abroad,
producing 200,000 machines annually at a Scottish plant that employed 6,000 workers. Singer’s advertising
rightly boasted of the international appeal of a product that the company dubbed “The Universal Sewing
Machine.” © Collection of the New-York Historical Society.

and included many Americans living in dire poverty.
As it wrought these changes, industrialization prompted
intense  debate  over  inequality  (Thinking  Like  a  His-
torian, p. 554).

Health Hazards and Pollution
Industrialized labor
also damaged workers’ health. In 1884, a study of the
Illinois Central Railroad showed that, over the previ-
ous decade, one in twenty of its workers had been killed
or permanently disabled by an accident on the job. For
brakemen — one of the most dangerous jobs — the rate
was one in seven. Due to lack of regulatory laws and
inspections, mining was 50 percent more dangerous in
the United States than in Germany; between 1876 and
1925,  an  average  of  over  2,000  U.S.  coal  miners  died
each  year  from  cave-ins  and  explosions.  Silver,  gold,
and copper mines were not immune from such trage-
dies, but mining companies resisted demands for safety
regulation.

Extractive  industries  and  factories  also  damaged
nearby environments and the people who lived there.
In big cities, poor residents suffered from polluted air
and the dumping of noxious by-products into the water
supply.  Mines  like  those  in  Leadville,  Colorado,  con-
taminated the land and water with mercury and lead.

Alabama convicts, forced to work in coal mines, faced
brutal working conditions and fatal illnesses caused by
the mines’ contamination of local water. At the time,
people were well aware of many of these dangers, but
workers  had  an  even  more  urgent  priority:  work.
Pittsburgh’s belching smokestacks meant coughing and
lung  damage,  but  they  also  meant  running  mills  and
paying jobs.

Unskilled Labor and Discrimination  As managers
deskilled  production,  the  ranks  of  factory  workers
came to include more and more women and children,
who were almost always unskilled and low paid. Men
often  resented  women’s  presence  in  factories,  and
male labor unions often worked to exclude women —
especially wives, who they argued should remain in the
home. Women vigorously defended their right to work.
On hearing accusations that married women worked
only to buy frivolous luxuries, one female worker in a
Massachusetts shoe factory wrote a heated response to
the  local  newspaper:  “When  the  husband  and  father
cannot provide for his wife and children, it is perfectly
natural  that  the  wife  and  mother  should  desire  to
work. . . . Don’t  blame  married  women  if  the  land  of
the free has become a land of slavery and oppression.”

