T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Poverty and Food

Amid rising industrial poverty, food emerged as a reference point. How much
was too little, or too much? If some Americans were going hungry, how should
others  respond?  The  documents  below  show  some  contributions  to  these
debates.

1.  Lewis W. Hine, “Mealtime, New York Tenement,”
1910. Hine was an inﬂuential photographer and
reformer. He took a famous series of photographs
at Ellis Island, remarking that he hoped Americans
would view new immigrants in the same way they
thought of the Pilgrims. What does the photog-
rapher emphasize in the living conditions of this
Italian immigrant family and their relationships
with one another? Why do you think Hine photo-
graphed them at the table?

George Eastman House.

2.  Louisa May Alcott, Little Women, 1869. Alcott’s

novel, popular for decades, exempliﬁed the ideal
of Christian charity. At the start of this scene, Mrs.
March returns from a Christmas morning expedition.

Merry Christmas, little daughters! . . . I want to say
one word before we sit down [to breakfast]. Not far away
from here lies a poor woman with a little newborn baby.
Six children are huddled into one bed to keep from freez-
ing, for they have no fire. There is nothing to eat. . . . My
girls, will you give them your breakfasts as a Christmas
present?

554

. . . For a minute no one spoke, only a minute, for Jo
exclaimed impetuously, I’m so glad you came before we
began!

May I go and help . . . ? asked Beth eagerly.
I shall take the cream and the muffins, added Amy. . . .

Meg was already covering the buckwheats and piling the
bread into one big plate.

I thought you’d do it, said Mrs. March, smiling.
. . . A poor, bare, miserable room it was, with broken
windows, no fire, ragged bedclothes, a sick mother, wail-
ing baby, and a group of pale, hungry children. . . . Mrs.
March gave the mother tea and gruel [while] the girls
meantime spread the table [and] set the children round
the fire. . . .

That was a very happy breakfast, though they didn’t
get any of it. And when they went away, leaving comfort
behind, I think there were not in all the city four merrier
people than the hungry little girls who gave away their
breakfasts and contented themselves with bread and milk
on Christmas morning.

3.  Mary Hinman Abel, Promoting Nutrition, 1890.

This excerpt is from a cookbook that won a prize
from the American Public Health Association. The
author had studied community cooking projects in
Europe and worked to meet the needs of Boston’s
poor. How does she propose to feed people on 13
cents a day — her most basic menu? What assump-
tions does she make about her audience? In what
ways was her cookbook, itself, a product of indus-
trialization?

For family of six, average price 78 cents per day, or 13
cents per person.
. . . I am going to consider myself as talking to the mother
of a family who has six mouths to feed, and no more
money than this to do it with. Perhaps this woman has
never kept accurate accounts. . . . I have in mind the wife
[who has] time to attend to the housework and children.
If a woman helps earn, as in a factory, doing most of her
housework after she comes home at night, she must cer-
tainly have more money than in the first case in order to
accomplish the same result.

