. . . The Proteid column is the one that you must
look to most carefully because it is furnished at the most
expense, and it is very important that it should not fall
below the figures I have given [or] your family would be
undernourished.

[Sample spring menu]
Breakfast. Milk Toast. Coffee.
Dinner. Stuffed Beef ’s Heart. Potatoes stewed with Milk.
Dried Apple Pie. Bread and Cheese. Corn Coffee.
Supper. Noodle Soup (from Saturday). Boiled Herring.
Bread. Tea.

Proteids. (oz.)

Fats. (oz.)

Carbohydrates. (oz.)

Cost in Cents.

21.20

14.39

77.08

76

4.  Werner Sombart, Why Is There No Socialism in the
United States?, 1906. Sombart, a German sociolo-
gist, compared living conditions in Germany and
the United States in order to answer the question
above. What conclusion did he reach?

The American worker eats almost three times as much
meat, three times as much flour and four times as much
sugar as his German counterpart. . . . The American
worker is much closer to the better sections of the Ger-
man middle class than to the German wage-labouring
class. He does not merely eat, but dines. . . .

It is no wonder if, in such a situation, any dissatis-
faction with the “existing social order” finds difficulty
in establishing itself in the mind of the worker. . . . All
Socialist utopias came to nothing on roast beef and
apple pie.

5.  Helen Campbell, Prisoners of Poverty, 1887. A

journalist, Campbell investigated the conditions of
low-paid seamstresses in New York City who did
piecework in their apartments. Like Abel (source 3),
she tried to teach what she called “survival eco-
nomics.” Here, a woman responds to Campbell’s
suggestion that she cook beans for better nutrition.

“Beans!” said one indignant soul. “What time have I to
think of beans, or what money to buy coal to cook ’em?
What you’d want if you sat over a machine fourteen
hours a day would be tea like lye to put a back-bone in
you. That’s why we have tea always in the pot, and it don’t
make much odds what’s with it. A slice of bread is about
all. . . . We’d our tea an’ bread an’ a good bit of fried beef
or pork, maybe, when my husband was alive an’ at
work. . . .  It’s the tea that keeps you up.”

6.  Julian Street, Show and Extravagance, 1910. Street,
a journalist, was invited to an elite home in Buf-
falo, New York, for a dinner that included cocktails,
ﬁne wines, caviar, a roast, Turkish coffee, and cigars.

Before we left New York there was newspaper talk about
some rich women who had organized a movement of
protest against the ever-increasing American tendency
toward show and extravagance. . . . Our hostess [in Buf-
falo] was the first to mention it, but several other ladies
added details. . . .

”We don’t intend to go to any foolish extremes,” said

one. . . . “We are only going to scale things down and
eliminate waste. There is a lot of useless show in this
country which only makes it hard for people who can’t
afford things. And even for those who can, it is wrong. . . .
Take this little dinner we had tonight. . . . In future we are
all going to give plain little dinners like this.”

“Plain?” I gasped. . . . “But I didn’t think it had begun

yet! I thought this dinner was a kind of farewell feast —
that it was —”

Our hostess looked grieved. The other ladies of the
league gazed at me reproachfully. . . . “Didn’t you notice?”
asked my hostess. . . .
“Notice what?”
“That we didn’t have champagne!”

Sources: (2) Louisa May Alcott, Little Women, Part 2, Chapter 2 at xroads.virginia
.edu/~HYPER/ALCOTT/ch2.html; (3) Mary Hinman Abel, Practical, Sanitary, and
Economic Cooking Adapted to Persons of Moderate and Small Means (American Public
Health Association, 1890), 143–154; (4) Werner Sombart, Why Is There No Socialism in
the United States?, trans. Patricia M. Hocking and C. T. Husbands (White Plains, NY:
International Arts and Sciences Press, 1976), 97, 105–106; (5) Helen Campbell,
Prisoners of Poverty (Cambridge, MA: University Press, 1887), 123–124; (6) Julian
Street, Abroad at Home (New York: The Century Co., 1915), 37–39.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  These documents were created by journalists and

reformers. What audiences did they seek to reach?
Why do you think they all focused on food?

2.  Imagine a conversation among these authors. How

might we account for the differences in Sombart’s and
Campbell’s ﬁndings? How might Hine, Abel, and Campbell
respond to Alcott’s vision of charitable Christian acts?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Using the documents above and your knowledge from this
chapter, write a short essay explaining some challenges and
opportunities faced by different Americans in the industrial-
izing era — including those of the wealthy elite, the emerg-
ing middle class, skilled blue-collar men, and very poorest
unskilled laborers. How did labor leaders and reformers
seek to persuade prosperous Americans to concern them-
selves with workers’ problems? To what dominant values
did they appeal?

555

