556

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

Child Labor

For many working-class families, children’s wages — even though they were low — made up an essential
part of the household income. These boys worked the night shift in a glass factory in Indiana. Lewis Hine,
an investigative photographer for the National Child Labor Committee, took their picture at midnight, as
part of a campaign to educate more prosperous Americans about the widespread employment of child
labor and the harsh conditions in which many children worked. Library of Congress.

In  1900,  one  of  every  five  children  under  the  age
of  sixteen  worked  outside  the  home.  Child  labor
was  most  widespread  in  the  South,  where  a  low-
wage  industrial  sector  emerged  after  Reconstruction
(Map 17.1). Textile mills sprouted in the Carolinas and
Georgia, recruiting workers from surrounding farms;
whole  families  often  worked  in  the  mills.  Many  chil-
dren  also  worked  in  Pennsylvania  coal  fields,  where
death and injury rates were high. State  law permitted
children  as  young  as  twelve  to  labor  with  a  family
member,  but  turn-of-the-century  investigators  esti-
mated  that  about  10,000  additional  boys,  at  even
younger ages, were illegally employed in the mines.

Also  at  the  bottom  of  the  pay  scale  were  most
African Americans. Corporations and industrial man-
ufacturers  widely  discriminated  against  them  on  the
basis of race, and such prejudice was hardly limited to
the  South.  After  the  Civil  War,  African  American
women  who  moved  to  northern  cities  were  largely

barred  from  office  work  and  other  new  employment
options;  instead,  they  remained  heavily  concentrated
in domestic service, with more than half employed as
cooks or servants. African American men confronted
similar  exclusion.  America’s  booming  vertically  inte-
grated  corporations  turned  black  men  away  from  all
but  the  most  menial  jobs.  In  1890,  almost  a  third  of
black  men  worked  in  personal  service.  Employers  in
the North and West recruited, instead, a different kind
of low-wage labor: newly arrived immigrants.

Immigrants, East and West
Across the globe, industrialization set people in motion
with the lure of jobs. Between the Civil War and World
War I, over 25 million immigrants entered the United
States. The American working class became truly global,
including  not  only  people  of  African  and  Western

