CHAPTER 17

  Industrial America: Corporations and Conflicts, 1877–1911

557

ArkansasR.

MO.

MississippiR.

St. Louis

(cid:2)

OhioR.

(cid:2)

Louisville

KY.

IND.
TERR.

ARK.

(cid:2)

Memphis

Nashville
(cid:2)
TENN.
Chattanooga
(cid:2)

MD.

DEL.

W. VA.

VA.

Richmond
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Newport
News

(cid:2)

Greensboro

N.C.

Charlotte

(cid:2)

S.C.

Ft. Worth

(cid:2)(cid:2)

Dallas

LA.

TEXAS

Houston

(cid:2)

Birmingham

(cid:2)

MISS.

ALA.

(cid:2)

Atlanta

(cid:2)

Augusta

GA.
Macon

(cid:2)

(cid:2)
Charleston

(cid:2)
Savannah

(cid:2)
Mobile

(cid:2)

New Orleans

G u l f   o f   M e x i c o

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

N

E

W

FLA.

S

Major railroads
Textile manufacturing
Coal and iron mining
Cotton-growing regions
Tobacco-growing regions

0

0

200

400 miles

200

400 kilometers

M E X I C O

MAP 17.1
The New South, 1900

The economy of the Old South focused on raising staple crops, especially cotton and tobacco.
In the New South, staple agriculture continued to dominate, but there was marked industrial
development as well. Industrial regions evolved, producing textiles, coal, and iron. By 1900, the
South’s industrial pattern was well deﬁned, though the region still served — like the West — as
a major producer of raw materials for the industrial region that stretched from New England
to Chicago.

European  descent  but  also  Southern  and  Eastern
Europeans, Mexicans, and Asians. In 1900, census tak-
ers found that more than 75 percent of San Francisco
and  New  York  City  residents  had  at  least  one  parent
who was foreign-born.

In  the  new  industrial  order,  immigrants  made  an
ideal labor supply. They took the worst jobs at low pay,
and  during  economic  downturns  tens  of  thousands
returned to their home countries, reducing the shock
of  unemployment  in  the  United  States.  But  many
native-born Americans viewed immigrants with hos-
tility,  through  the  lens  of  racial,  ethnic,  and  religious
prejudices.  They  also  feared  that  immigrants  would
take more coveted jobs and erode white men’s wages.

For immigrants themselves, America could be disori-
enting, liberating, and disappointing.

Newcomers from Europe
Mass  migration  from  Western  Europe  had  started
in the 1840s, when more than one million Irish fled a
terrible  famine.  In  the  following  decades,  as  Europe’s
population grew rapidly and agriculture became com-
mercialized, peasant economies suffered, first in Ger-
many and Scandinavia, then across Austria-Hungary,
Russia, Italy, and the Balkans. This upheaval displaced
millions of rural people. Some went to Europe’s mines
and  factories;  others  headed  for  South  America  and

