558

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

German Beer, Mexican Workers, c. 1900

Immigrants from Germany owned and managed most of the breweries in the United States. But workers
at the Maier and Zoblein Brewery in Los Angeles came from many nations, including Mexico. At that time,
about 4,000 Mexicans lived in Los Angeles County (about 4 percent of the population); by 1930, 150,000
Mexican-born immigrants lived in Los Angeles, making up about 7 percent of the city’s rapidly growing
population. Los Angeles Public Library.

the  United  States  (Map  17.2;  America  Compared,
p. 560).

“America  was  known  to  foreigners,”  remembered
one Jewish woman from Lithuania, “as the land where
you’d get rich.” But the reality was much harsher. Even
in the age of steam, a transatlantic voyage was grueling.
For  ten  to  twenty  days,  passengers  in  steerage  class
crowded  belowdecks,  eating  ter-
rible  food  and  struggling  with
seasickness.  An  investigator  who
traveled  with  immigrants  from
Naples asked, “How can a steerage
passenger  remember  that  he  is  a
human being when he must first

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
What factors accounted
for the different expecta-
tions and experiences of
immigrants in this era?

pick the worms from his food?” After 1892, European
immigrants were routed through the enormous receiv-
ing station at New York’s Ellis Island.

Some immigrants brought skills. Many Welshmen,
for  example,  arrived  in  the  United  States  as  experi-
enced tin-plate makers; Germans came as machinists
and carpenters, Scandinavians as sailors. But industri-
alization required, most of all, increasing quantities of
unskilled  labor.  As  poor  farmers  from  Italy,  Greece,
and Eastern Europe arrived in the United States, heavy,
low-paid labor became their domain.

In  an  era  of  cheap  railroad  and  steamship  travel,
many immigrants expected to work and save for a few
years and then head home. More than 800,000 French

