CHAPTER 17

  Industrial America: Corporations and Conflicts, 1877–1911

559

1871–1880

0

0

200

400 miles

200

400 kilometers

1901–1910

0

0

200

400 miles

200

400 kilometers

N

E

W

S

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

NORWAY

SWEDEN

SCOTLAND

IRELAND

North
Sea
DENMARK
NETHERLANDS

ENGLAND

GERMANY

BELGIUM

FRANCE

SWITZERLAND

AUSTRIA-
HUNGARY

N

E

W

S

ATLA NTIC
OCEAN

NORWAY

SWEDEN

SCOTLAND

IRELAND

North
Sea

DENMARK

NETHERLANDS

ENGLAND

GERMANY

BELGIUM

R U S S I A

Caspian
Sea

R U S S I A

Caspian
Sea

FRANCE

SWITZERLAND

AUSTRIA-
HUNGARY

PORTUGAL

SPAIN

ITALY

ROMANIA

Black Sea

BULGARIA

SERBIA

GREECE

OTTOMAN EMPIRE

PORTUGAL

SPAIN

ITALY

Black Sea

OTTOMAN EMPIRE

Mediterranean Sea

Me diterranea n Se a

Number of Immigrants per Decade to the United States

To 10,000

100,000–500,000

500,000–1,000,000

1,000,000–2,000,000

Over 2,000,000

Approximate area of immigrants to the United States claiming Polish ancestry.
Poland was not an independent country at this time.

MAP 17.2
Sources of European Immigration to the United States, 1871–1910

Around 1900, Americans began to speak of the “new” immigration. They meant the large numbers
of immigrants arriving from Eastern and Southern Europe — Poles, Slovaks and other Slavic peoples,
Yiddish-speaking Jews, Italians — who overwhelmed the still substantial number of immigrants from
the British Isles and Northern Europe.

Canadians moved to New England in search of textile
jobs,  many  families  with  hopes  of  scraping  together
enough savings to return to Quebec and buy a  farm.
Thousands of men came alone, especially from Ireland,
Italy, and Greece. Many single Irishwomen also immi-
grated. But some would-be sojourners ended up stay-
ing a lifetime, while immigrants who had expected to
settle permanently found themselves forced to leave by
an accident or sudden economic depression. One his-
torian has estimated that a third of immigrants to the
United  States  in  this  era  returned  to  their  home
countries.

Along  with  Italians  and  Greeks,  Eastern  European
Jews  were  among  the  most  numerous  arrivals.  The
first American Jews, who numbered around 50,000 in
1880, had been mostly of German-Jewish descent. In the
next four decades, more than 3 million poverty-stricken

Jews arrived from Russia, Ukraine, Poland, and other
parts  of  Eastern  Europe,  transforming  the  Jewish
presence in the United States. Like other immigrants,
they  sought  economic  opportunity,  but  they  also
came to escape religious repression (American Voices,
p. 562).

Wherever they came from, immigrants took a con-
siderable  gamble  in  traveling  to  the  United  States.
Some prospered quickly, especially if they came  with
education,  money,  or  well-placed  business  contacts.
Others, by toiling many years in harsh conditions, suc-
ceeded  in  securing  a  better  life  for  their  children  or
grandchildren.  Still  others  met  with  catastrophe  or
early death. One Polish man who came with his par-
ents  in  1908  summed  up  his  life  over  the  next  thirty
years  as  “a  mere  struggle  for  bread.”  He  added:
“Sometimes I think life isn’t worth a damn for a man

