A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Emigrants and

Destinations,

1881–1915

The United States received more new residents than any other nation during the
era  of  industrialization,  but  it  was  not  the  only  place  where  emigrants  (those
departing)  became  immigrants  (those  arriving).  The  graph  below  shows  six
major destinations for emigrants from four European countries.

British Emigrants
(excluding Ireland)

German Emigrants

United States 57%

Canada 22%

United States 95%

Oceania* 13%

Africa 8%

Africa <1%
Oceania* <1%

Brazil 2 %
Canada 1%
Argentina 1%

Italian Emigrants

Swedish Emigrants

United States 55%

Argentina 23%

United States
100%

Brazil 16 %

Oceania* <1%

Africa 3%

Canada 2%

* Primarily to Australia and New Zealand

FIGURE 17.2
Major Destinations for Emigrants, 1881–1915

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  What might account for the different emigration patterns

shown here?

2.  What choices and limitations might each group of emi-

grants have faced in choosing the country to which they

emigrated? Do these ﬁgures suggest anything about the
conditions various groups may have encountered in differ-
ent countries, upon arrival?

like  me. . . . Look  at  my  wife  and  kids — undernour-
ished,  seldom  have  a  square  meal.”  But  an  Orthodox
Russian  Jewish  woman  told  an  interviewer  that  she
“thanked  God  for  America,”  where  she  had  married,
raised three children, and made a good life. She “liked
everything  about  this  country,  especially  its  leniency
toward the Jews.”

Asian Americans and Exclusion
Compared  with  Europeans,  newcomers  from  Asia
faced even harsher treatment. The first Chinese immi-
grants  had  arrived  in  the  late  1840s  during  the  Cal-
ifornia gold rush. After the Civil War, the Burlingame
Treaty  between  the  United  States  and  China  opened

560

