CHAPTER 17

  Industrial America: Corporations and Conflicts, 1877–1911

561

the  way  for  increasing  numbers  to  emigrate.  Fleeing
poverty  and  upheaval  in  southern  China,  they,  like
European  immigrants,  filled  low-wage  jobs  in  the
American  economy.  The  Chinese  confronted  threats
and  violence.  “We  kept  indoors  after  dark  for  fear  of
being  shot  in  the  back,”  remembered  one  Chinese
immigrant to California. During the depression of the
1870s, a rising tide of racism was especially extreme in
the Pacific coast states, where the majority of Chinese
immigrants  lived.  “The  Chinese  must  go!”  railed
Dennis Kearney, leader of the California Workingmen’s
Party, who referred to Asians as “almond-eyed lepers.”
Incited  by  Kearney  in  July  1877,  a  mob  burned  San
Francisco’s  Chinatown  and  beat  up  residents.  In  the
1885 Rock Springs massacre in Wyoming, white men
burned  the  local  Chinatown  and  murdered  at  least
twenty-eight Chinese miners.

Despite such atrocities, some Chinese managed to
build profitable businesses and farms. Many did so by
filling the only niches native-born Americans left open
to  them:  running  restaurants  and  laundries.  Facing
intense political pressure, Congress in 1882 passed the
Chinese  Exclusion  Act,  specifically  barring  Chinese

laborers from entering the United States. Each decade
thereafter, Congress renewed the law and tightened its
provisions;  it  was  not  repealed  until  1943.  Exclusion
barred  almost  all  Chinese  women,  forcing  husbands
and wives to spend many years apart when men took
jobs in the United States.

Asian immigrants made vigorous use of the courts
to try to protect their rights. In a series of cases brought
by  Chinese  and  later  Japanese  immigrants,  the  U.S.
Supreme  Court  ruled  that  all  persons  born  in  the
United States had citizenship rights that could not be
revoked, even if their parents had been born abroad.
Nonetheless, well into the twentieth century, Chinese
immigrants  (as  opposed  to  native-born  Chinese
Americans) could not apply for citizenship. Meanwhile,
Japanese and a few Korean immigrants also began to
arrive; by 1909, there were 40,000 Japanese immigrants
working in agriculture, 10,000 on railroads, and 4,000
in canneries. In 1906, the U.S. attorney general ruled
that  Japanese  and  Koreans,  like  Chinese  immigrants,
were barred from citizenship.

The Chinese Exclusion Act created the legal foun-
dations  on  which  far-reaching  exclusionary  policies

Chinese Workers in a
Salmon Cannery, c. 1900

Shut out of many ﬁelds of
employ ment by racial discrimina-
tion, many Chinese immigrants
founded their own restaurants,
laundries, and other small
busi nesses. Others, like these
cannery workers in Astoria,
Oregon, took on some of the
most grueling and lowest-paid
work in the American economy.
Job segregation reinforced, in
turn, racial prejudice. Visiting
British author Rudyard Kipling,
touring canneries along the
Columbia River, described
Chinese workers in the plants
as “blood-besmeared yellow
devils.” These workers, refuting
Kipling’s slur, appear clean and
respectable. Notice the man in
an apron, on the left, who wears
his traditional queue, or braided
pigtail, tucked into his straw hat.
Oregon Historical Society.

