A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Jewish Immigrants in

the Industrial Economy

Following  anti-Semitic  violence  in  Russia  during  the  1880s,  thousands  of  Jews
ﬂed  to  the  United  States.  Almost  a  quarter  million  came  between  1881  and
1890, the majority settling in New York City. These poverty-stricken newcomers
posed problems for New York’s assimilated Jews, most of whom were German-
or  American-born.  Community  support  networks  were  quickly  overwhelmed;
New  York’s  United  Hebrew  Charities  almost  went  bankrupt.  Jewish  leaders
watched with dismay the expansion of tenement wards. They worried that the
presence of so many Eastern European “beggars,” as one Reform rabbi put it,
would heighten American anti-Semitism.

In  1901,  New  York’s  Jewish  leaders  founded  an  Industrial  Removal  Ofﬁce
(IRO)  to  help  disperse  Jewish  newcomers.  By  1922  the  ofﬁce  sent  over  79,000
Eastern European Jews to locations across the country. IRO correspondence pro-
vides a window on how newcomers sought to negotiate places in America’s in-
dustrial economy. Note that most of the letters are translated from Yiddish. As
one immigrant noted, inability to speak English could limit employment oppor-
tunities and cause “great distress.”

Alex Grubman
Letter from Portland, Oregon, 1905

I write you how fortunate I am in being placed in one
of the largest dry goods houses in Oregon by Hon. Sig
Sichel. . . . He went personally with me until he procured
the present position for me as inside salesman and to start
at $60 a month. . . . [Many people here] wish me to thank
the I.R.O. for helping them to success. . . . Mr. Lvov or
Lvovsky, a tinsmith sent out direct 2 years ago has a stove
and hardware store. M. Kaplan a tailor is earning $20–
25.00 a week. Mr. Nathan Siegel who arrived only a few
days ago is already employed as a clerk earning $10.00
for a start.

Barnet Marlin
Letter from Atlanta, Georgia, 1906

Dr. Wildauer secured a place for me to work, at wooden
trunks. . . . I could not earn more than 60 cents a day and
was working harder than a horse. . . . Atlanta does not
pay to work, especially for a foreigner. . . . Several weeks
passed by and at the end I was in debt. . . .

During that time I became acquainted with a Jewish

policeman and he was the only one who took pity on
me. . . . I told my friend the policeman that I had $15.00
(sent to me by my brother) and he advised me to go out
peddling. He took me to a store and told the storekeeper
to furnish me for over $30.00 worth of goods. He also

acted as my reference and prepared me with everything. I
went out peddling and gradually I earned enough money
to pay all my debts; and so I kept on peddling. I earned
enough money and bought a horse and wagon. I now
convey goods from the city to the country and sell them
there. I thank you very much for sending me to Atlanta.

Raphael Gershoni
Letter from Atlanta, Georgia, 1905

Why do you sent people to Atlanta? You give them eight
days worth of food and then you let them starve in the
street among Negroes. . . . I was given a job to work in a
restaurant kitchen, to wait on Negroes, and to clean the
Negroes’ closets, for three dollars a week. . . . I was then
given ten dollars for goods so that I might go around and
peddle in Atlanta. But out of this ten dollars, I have to pay
four dollars for lodging and three dollars a month for a
place just to lay my head. . . .  It is hopeless to work in
Atlanta. The highest wage is 75 cents a day. And for what
kind of work? . . . The competition is difficult here. Why
should anyone hire a white greenhorn when they can get
a black Negro, who is strong as iron. . . .  Everyone says
that the only choice here is to go out into the countryside
and peddle. But one needs 40–50 dollars worth of goods.
How do I get the money? . . . I would like to ask you to
help me out. Help me crawl out of black Atlanta and go
to Chicago. There I have friends and can make out better.

562

