Charles Zwirn
Letter from La Crosse, Wisconsin, 1913

Nathan Toplitzky
Letter from Detroit, Michigan, 1908

[Mr. Goldfish] took me into his house and gave me a
very nice welcome. He then led me to the synagogue and
introduced me to all the members. Mr. Goldfish is a Jew
with a real Jewish heart. He is religiously inclined and the
biggest businessman in the city. If any controversy arises,
it is always settled by Mr. Goldfish. . . . [He] took me to
a shop and they paid me $6 more than I earned in New
York. When I wanted to thank him, he said that the only
thing he expects of me is that I conduct myself properly
and go on the right path so I can eventually succeed. This,
he said, was the best reward I can give him. I did as he
told me and saved a few hundred dollars. . . .

Another man sent here had been in the country two
months. . . . He was sent to Mr. Goldfish, who found him
a job sorting corks for $2 a day. . . . He then left. By the
way, . . . would you be so kind as to send to me a boy to
drive a milk wagon on Mr. Jacob’s farm and an older man
to work at junk? They must be honest and respectable
people.

Mary Rubin
Letter from New Orleans, Louisiana, 1905

You have sent us out here to starve for hunger and live
in the streets. . . . We have arrived in New Orleans about
12 o’clock in the night, and there was nobody to await us
there, and we had to go around alnight and look for the
address which you had given. . . . They put the nine of us
all in one room, with out a bed or a pillow to sleep on. . . .
Then they took Mr. Rubin and his wife up to the cigar
factory and gave them both a job. Mrs. Rubin is getting
about four ($4) a week and Mr. Rubin five ($5). Now we
will ask you if a family man can make a living with that.
And Mr. Rosenthal they told if he wants work he will
have to look for it himself. . . . When he found work,
they told him to bring his tools and come to work. He
went to the office and asked for the tools; they told him
that he can’t have them.

. . . [The local Committee] sent mama to be a cook
for $4 a month, which she had never done before, and if
she wanted to be a cook in N.Y. she could have gotten 3
times that much or more, but it did not suit us to let our
mother be a cook, and now we should have to do.

I, Nathan Toplitzky, sent to the above city 5 months ago,
wish to inform you that a great misfortune has happened
to me. Your committee has placed me to work in a machine
factory where I have earned $.75 a day, and being unskilled
I have had 4 of my fingers torn from my right hand. I now
remain a cripple throughout my life. For six weeks my
sufferings were indescribable.

When the condition of my health improved a little, I
called on the Committee and they advised me to go back
to the old employer. I went back to him and he placed me
to work at the same machine where the accident occurred.
Having lost my fingers I was unable to operate the
machine. . . . Kindly write to your Committee to find
a position for me.

S. Klein
Letter from Cleveland, Ohio, 1905

In the past week something terrible has happened here.
Two men sent here by the Removal Office committed
suicide out of despair. One took poison and the other
hanged himself. . . . That shows the deplorable condition
of those who are sent here by the Removal Office. The
Cleveland Removal Office is managed by an inexperi-
enced young man who maintains his position merely
through favoritism. . . . It was told to me that the one
who hanged himself came to this agent and implored
him with tears in his eyes to provide some kind of
employment.

Source: Letters from the Records of the Industrial Removal Office; 1-91; AJHS, NY, NY
and Boston, MA as follows: Alex Grubman, Box 116, Folder 14; Barnet Marlin, Box 95,
Folder 4; Raphael Gershoni, Box 95, Folder 4; Charles Zwirn, Box 120, Folder 9; Mary
Rubin, Box 99, Folder 17; Nathan Toplitky, Box 101, Folder 7; S. Klein, Box 114, Folder 5.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS
1.  Based on the accounts above, what factors contributed
to an immigrant’s economic success or failure in a new
location?

2.  In at least ten places, the immigrants above report on

wages — daily, weekly, or monthly. For comparison, make
a rough conversion of all of these to weekly wages and
list them. What do you conclude about compensation
for professional, skilled, and unskilled work?

3.  Using information from this chapter, as well as the docu-
ments above, explain why immigrants sent to the South
might have faced more difﬁculties, on average, than
those sent to other parts of the country.

563

