564

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What were the long-term
consequences of the Chi-
nese Exclusion Act for U.S.
immigration policy?

would  be  built  in  the  1920s  and
after (Chapter 22). To enforce the
law, Congress and the courts gave
sweeping  new  powers  to  immi-
gration officials, transforming the
Chinese into America’s first illegal
immigrants.  Drawn,  like  others,
by the promise of jobs in America’s expanding econ-
omy,  Chinese  men  stowed  away  on  ships  or  walked
across  the  borders.  Disguising  themselves  as  Mexi-
cans — who at that time could freely enter the United
States — some  perished  in  the  desert  as  they  tried  to
reach California.

Some would-be immigrants, known as paper sons,
relied on Chinese residents in the United States, who
generated documents falsely claiming the newcomers
as  American-born  children.  Paper  sons  memorized
pages  of  information  about  their  supposed  relatives
and hometowns. The San Francisco earthquake of 1906
helped their cause by destroying all the port’s records.
“That was a big chance for a lot of Chinese,” remem-
bered one immigrant. “They forged themselves certifi-
cates  saying  they  could  go  back  to  China  and  bring
back four or five sons, just like that!” Such persistence

ensured  that,  despite  the  harsh  policies  of  Chinese
exclusion,  the  flow  of  Asian  immigrants  never  fully
ceased.

Labor Gets Organized
In  the  American  political  system,  labor  has  typically
been  weak.  Industrial  workers  cluster  in  cities,  near
factories  and  jobs;  compared  with  small  towns  and
rural areas, urban areas have been underrepresented in
bodies  such  as  the  U.S.  Senate  and  the  presidential
electoral college, in which representation is calculated
by  state,  rather  than  (or  in  addition  to)  individuals.
This problem became acute in the era of industrializa-
tion,  and  it  has  lingered.  Even  today,  the  twenty-two
U.S. senators elected from Alaska, Idaho, Iowa, Maine,
Mississippi,  Montana,  New  Mexico,  North  Dakota,
Vermont,  West  Virginia,  and  Wyoming  represent  a
smaller number of people, combined, than the two U.S.
senators who represent heavily urban California.

Faced  with  this  obstacle,  labor  advocates  could
adopt  one  of  two  strategies.  First,  they  could  try  to
make political alliances with sympathetic rural voters

Anti-Chinese Racism

This cartoon from the magazine
Puck, drawn by James A. Wales
during the 1880 presidential
campaign, offers vivid evidence
of the widespread and virulent
American prejudice against
Chinese immigrants. Republican
candidate James Garﬁeld, on the
left, and Democratic candidate
Winﬁeld Scott Hancock, on the
right, both nail up their party’s
“planks” in favor of restricting
Chinese immigration. Asian
immigrants were not permitted
to apply for naturalization as
U.S. citizens; they thus had no
vote and no power in politics.
Congress passed the Chinese
Exclusion Act, with bipartisan
support, soon after Garﬁeld’s
victory. Library of Congress.

