CHAPTER 17

  Industrial America: Corporations and Conflicts, 1877–1911

565

who shared their problems. Second, they could reject
politics  and  create  narrowly  focused  trade  unions  to
negotiate  directly  with  employers.  In  general,  labor
advocates  emphasized  the  first  strategy  between  the
1870s  and  the  early  1890s,  and  the  latter  in  the  early
twentieth century. Across this era, while industrializa-
tion made America increasingly rich and powerful, it
also  brought  large-scale  conflict  between  labor  and
capital.

The Emergence of a Labor Movement
The  problem  of  industrial  labor  entered  Americans’
consciousness  dramatically  with  the  Great  Railroad
Strike  of  1877.  Protesting  steep  wage  cuts  amid  the
depression that had begun in 1873, thousands of rail-
road workers walked off the job. Broader issues were at
stake. “The officers of the road,” reported strike leader
Barney Donahue in upstate New York, “were bound to
break the spirit of the men, and any or all organizations
they  belonged  to.”  He  believed  railroad  companies
wanted  to  block  workers  from  “all  fellowship  for
mutual  aid.”  The  strike  brought  rail  travel  and  com-
merce to a halt. Thousands of people poured into the
streets  of  Buffalo,  Pittsburgh,  and  Chicago  to  protest
the economic injustice wrought by railroads — as well
as  fires  caused  by  stray  sparks  from  locomotives  and
injuries and deaths on train tracks in urban neighbor-
hoods. When Pennsylvania’s governor sent state militia
to break the strike, Pittsburgh crowds reacted by burn-
ing  railroad  property  and  overturning  locomotives.
Similar clashes between police and protesters occurred
in  other  cities  across  the  country,  from  Galveston,
Texas, to San Francisco.

The 1877 strike left more than fifty people dead and
caused $40 million worth of damage, primarily to rail-
road  property.  “It  seemed  as  if  the  whole  social  and
political structure was on the very brink of ruin,” wrote
one journalist. For their role in the strike, many rail-
road workers were fired and blacklisted: railroad com-
panies circulated their names on a “do not hire” list to
prevent them from getting any work in the industry. In
the  aftermath  of  the  strike,  the  U.S.  government  cre-
ated  the  National  Guard,  intended  not  to  protect
Americans  against  foreign  invasion  but  to  enforce
order at home.

Watching the upheavals of industrialization, some
radical  thinkers  pointed  out  its  impact  on  workers.
Among the most influential was Henry George, whose
book Progress and Poverty (1879) was a best-seller for
decades after publication. George warned that Ameri-
cans  had  been  too  optimistic  about  the  impact  of

railroads  and  manufacturing,  which  they  hoped
would — after  an  initial  period  of  turmoil — bring
prosperity to all. George believed the emerging indus-
trial order meant permanent poverty. Industrialization,
he wrote, was driving a wedge through society, lifting
the fortunes of professionals and the middle class but
pushing the working class down by forcing them into
deskilled, dangerous, and low-paid labor. George’s pro-
posed solution, a federal “single tax” on landholdings,
did  not  win  widespread  support,  but  his  insightful
diagnosis  of  the  problem  helped  encourage  radical
movements for economic reform.

Many  rural  people  believed  they  faced  the  same
problems as industrial workers. In the new economy,
they found themselves at the mercy of large corpora-
tions, from equipment dealers who sold them harvest-
ers  and  plows  to  railroads  and  grain  elevators  that
shipped  and  stored  their  products.  Though  farmers
appeared  to  have  more  independence  than  corporate
employees, many felt trapped in a web of middlemen
who chipped away at their profits while international
forces robbed them of decision-making power.

Farmers denounced not only corporations but also
the previous two decades of government efforts to fos-
ter economic development — policies that now seemed
wrongheaded.  Farmers’  advocates  argued  that  high
tariffs forced rural families to pay too much for basic
necessities  while  failing  to  protect  America’s  great
export crops, cotton and wheat. At the same time, they
charged,  Republican  financial  policies  benefitted
banks, not borrowers. Farmers blamed railroad com-
panies for taking government grants and subsidies to
build but then charging unequal rates that privileged
big  manufacturers.  From  the  farmers’  point  of  view,
public  money  had  been  used  to  build  giant  railroad
companies that turned around and exploited ordinary
people.

The  most  prominent  rural  protest  group  of  the
early postwar decades was the National Grange of the
Patrons of Husbandry, founded in 1867. Like industrial
workers, Grange farmers sought to counter the rising
power  of  corporate  middlemen  through  cooperation
and mutual aid. Local Grange halls brought farm fam-
ilies  together  for  recreation  and  conversation.  The
Grange set up its own banks, insurance companies, and
grain elevators, and, in Iowa, even a farm implement
factory. Many Grange members also advocated politi-
cal action, building independent local parties that ran
on anticorporate platforms.

During  the  1870s  depression,  Grangers,  labor
advocates,  and  local  workingmen’s  parties  forged  a
national  political  movement,  the  Greenback-Labor

