566

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

Houston’s Cotton Depot, c. 1909

After the Civil War, cotton agriculture blossomed on the rich lands of east Texas, and Houston simultaneously
blossomed as the region’s commercial center. This tinted photograph from the 1890s reveals the tremendous
volume of trafﬁc that came through Houston, where Texas cotton was compacted in steam-powered cotton
presses, loaded onto railcars, and shipped to cotton mills in the Southeast and Britain to be made into cloth.
University of Houston Libraries, Special Collections, George Fuerman Collection.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did the methods
used by railroad workers
to protest their working
conditions compare with
the tactics employed by
the Greenbackers, who
also sought reform?

Party. In the South, Greenbackers
protested  the  collapse  of  Recon-
struction  and  urged  that  every
man’s  vote  be  protected.  Across
the  country,  Greenbackers  advo-
cated  laws  to  regulate  corpora-
tions  and  enforce  an  eight-hour
workday to reduce long, grueling
work  hours.  They  called  for  the
federal government to print more
greenback dollars and increase the amount of money
in  circulation;  this,  they  argued,  would  stimulate  the
economy, create jobs, and help borrowers by allowing
them to pay off debts in dollars that, over time, slowly
decreased in value. Greenbackers, like many industrial
labor leaders, subscribed to the ideal of  producerism:
they  dismissed  middlemen,  bankers,  lawyers,  and
investors  as  idlers  who  lived  off  the  sweat  of  people
who worked with their hands. As a Pittsburgh worker
put it in an 1878 poem, it was not the money-handlers

or executives at the top but the “noble sons of Labor . . . /
Who with bone, and brain, and fiber / Make the nation’s
wealth.”

The  Greenback  movement  radicalized  thousands
of farmers, miners, and industrial workers. In Alabama’s
coal-mining regions, black and white miners cooper-
ated  in  the  party.  Texas  boasted  seventy  African
American Greenback clubs. In 1878, Greenback-Labor
candidates  won  more  than  a  million  votes,  and  the
party  elected  fifteen  congressmen  nationwide.  In  the
Midwest, Greenback pressure helped trigger a wave of
economic regulatory actions known as Granger laws.
By the early 1880s, twenty-nine states had created rail-
road commissions to supervise railroad rates and poli-
cies; others appointed commissions to regulate insur-
ance  and  utility  companies.  Such  early  regulatory
efforts were not always effective, but they were crucial
starting  points  for  reform.  While  short-lived,  the
Green back movement created the foundation for more
sustained efforts to regulate big business.

