CHAPTER 17

  Industrial America: Corporations and Conflicts, 1877–1911

567

The Knights of Labor
The most important union of the late nineteenth cen-
tury, the  Knights  of  Labor, was founded in 1869 as a
secret  society  of  garment  workers  in  Philadelphia.  In
1878, as the Greenback movement reached its height,
some Knights served as delegates to Greenback-Labor
conventions.  Like  Grangers,  Knights  believed  that
ordinary people needed control over the enterprises in
which  they  worked.  They  proposed  to  set  up  shops
owned by employees, transforming America into what
they  called  a  cooperative  commonwealth.  In  keeping
with this broad-based vision, the order practiced open
membership,  irrespective  of  race,  gender,  or  field  of
employment — though,  like  other  labor  groups,  the
Knights excluded Chinese immigrants.

The  Knights  had  a  strong  political  bent.  They
believed  that  only  electoral  action  could  bring  about
many of their goals, such as government regulation of
corporations and laws that required employers to nego-
tiate  during  strikes.  Their  1878  platform  denounced
the  “aggressiveness  of  great  capitalists  and  corpora-
tions.” “If we desire to enjoy the full blessings of life,”
the  Knights  warned,  “a  check  [must]  be  placed  upon
unjust accumulation, and the power for evil of aggre-
gated wealth.” Among their demands were workplace
safety laws, prohibition of child labor, a federal tax on
the nation’s highest incomes, public ownership of tele-
graphs  and  railroads,  and  government  recognition of
workers’ right to organize. The Knights also advocated
personal responsibility and self-discipline. Their leader,
Terence  Powderly,  warned  that  the  abuse  of  liquor
robbed as many workers of their wages as did ruthless
employers.

Growing  rapidly  in  the  1880s,  the  Knights  union
was sprawling and decentralized. It  included not only
skilled craftsmen such as carpenters, ironworkers, and
beer brewers but also textile workers in Rhode Island,
domestic  workers  in  Georgia,  and  tenant  farmers  in
Arkansas. Knights organized workingmen’s parties to
advocate a host of reforms, ranging from an eight-hour
workday to cheaper streetcar fares and better garbage
collection in urban areas. One of their key innovations
was  hiring  a  full-time  women’s  organizer,  Leonora
Barry. An Irish American widow who was forced into
factory work after her husband’s death, Barry became a
labor advocate out of horror at the conditions she expe-
rienced  on  the  job.  To  the  discomfort  of  some  male
Knights, she investigated and exposed widespread evi-
dence of sexual harassment on the job.

The Knights’ growth in the 1880s showed the grass-
roots basis of labor activism. Powderly tried to avoid

The Knights of Labor

The caption on this union card — “By Industry we Thrive” —
expresses the core principle of the Knights of Labor that
everything of value is the product of honest labor. The two
ﬁgures are ideal representations of that “producerist”
belief — handsome workers, respectably attired, doing
productive labor. A picture of the Grand Master Workman,
Terence V. Powderly, hangs on the wall, benignly watching
them. Picture Research Consultants & Archives.

strikes, which he saw as costly and risky. But the orga-
nization’s greatest growth resulted from spontaneous,
grassroots striking. In 1885, thousands of workers on
the  Southwest  Railroad  walked  off  the  job  to  protest
wage cuts; afterward, they telegraphed the Knights and
asked to be admitted as members. The strike enhanced
the Knights’ reputation among workers and built mem-
bership to 750,000. By the following year, local assem-
blies  had  sprung  up  in  every  state  and  almost  every
county in the United States.

Just  as  the  Knights  reached
this pinnacle of influence, an epi-
sode  of  violence  brought  them
down.  In  1886,  a  protest  at  the
in
McCormick  reaper  works

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors contributed
to the rapid rise of the
Knights of Labor? To its
decline?

