568

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

Industrial Violence: A Dynamited Mine, 1894

Strikes in the western mining regions pitted ruthless owners, bent on control of their property and work-
force, against ﬁercely independent miners who knew how to use dynamite. Some of the bloodiest conﬂicts
occurred in Colorado mining towns, where the Western Federation of Miners (WFM) had strong support and
a series of Republican governors sent state militia to back the mine owners. Violence broke out repeatedly
between the early 1890s and the 1910s. At Victor, Colorado, in May 1894, as dozens of armed sheriffs’
deputies closed in on angry WFM members occupying the Strong Mine in protest, the miners blew up the
mine’s shaft house and boiler. Showered with debris, the deputies boarded the next train out of town.
Because Colorado then had a Populist governor, Davis Waite, who sympathized with the miners and
ordered the deputies to disband, this strike was one of the few in which owners and miners reached
a peaceful settlement — a temporary victory for the union. Library of Congress.

Chicago led to a clash with police that left four strikers
dead.  (Three  unions,  including  a  Knights  of  Labor
assembly, had struck, but the Knights had reached an
agreement and returned to work. Only the machinists’
union remained on strike when the incident occurred.)
Chicago was a hotbed of anarchism, the revolutionary
advocacy of a stateless society. Local anarchists, many
of them German immigrants, called a protest meeting
the next day, May 4, 1886, at Haymarket Square. When
police  tried  to  disperse  the  crowd,  someone  threw  a
bomb that killed several policemen. Officers responded
with gunfire. In the trial that followed, eight anarchists
were found guilty of murder and criminal conspiracy.
All were convicted, not on any definitive evidence that
one of them threw the bomb (the bomber’s identity still
remains  unknown)  but  on  the  basis  of  their  antigov-
ernment speeches. Four of the eight were executed by
hanging,  one  committed  suicide  in  prison,  and  the
others received long sentences.

The Haymarket violence profoundly damaged the
American labor movement. Seizing on resulting anti-
union  hysteria,  employers  took  the  offensive.  They
broke strikes with mass arrests, tied up the Knights in
expensive  court  proceedings,  and  forced  workers  to
sign contracts pledging not to join labor organizations.
The Knights of Labor never recovered. In the view of
the press and many prosperous Americans, they were
tainted by their alleged links with anarchism. Struggles
between industrialists and workers had created bitter
divides.

Farmers and Workers:
The Cooperative Alliance
In the aftermath of Haymarket, the Knights’ coopera-
tive  vision  did  not  entirely  fade.  A  new  rural  move-
ment, the Farmers’ Alliance, arose to take up many of
the issues that Grangers and Greenbackers had earlier

