CHAPTER 17

  Industrial America: Corporations and Conflicts, 1877–1911

569

sought to address. Founded in Texas during the depres-
sion of the 1870s, the Farmers’ Alliance spread across
the plains states and the South, becoming by the late
1880s the largest farmer-based movement in American
history. A separate Colored Farmers’ Alliance arose to
represent  rural  African  Americans.  The  harsh  condi-
tions  farmers  were  enduring — including  drought  in
the West and plunging global prices for corn, cotton,
and wheat — intensified the movement’s appeal. Travel-
ing Alliance lecturers exhorted farmers to “stand as a
great  conservative  body  against . . . the  growing  cor-
ruption of wealth and power.”

Like  earlier  movements,  Alliance  leaders  pinned
their initial hopes on cooperative stores and exchanges
that would circumvent middlemen. Cooperatives gath-
ered farmers’ orders and bought in bulk at  wholesale
prices, passing the savings along. Alliance cooperatives
achieved notable victories in the late 1880s. The Dakota
Alliance,  for  example,  offered  members  cheap  hail
insurance and low prices on machinery and farm sup-
plies. The Texas Alliance established a huge coopera-
tive  enterprise  to  market  cotton  and  provide  farmers
with  cheap  loans.  When  cotton  prices  fell  further  in
1891, however, the Texas exchange failed. Other coop-
eratives also suffered from chronic underfunding and
lack of credit, and they faced hostility from merchants
and lenders they tried to circumvent.

The Texas Farmers’ Alliance thus proposed a fed-
eral price-support system for farm products, modeled
on the national banks. Under this plan, the federal gov-
ernment  would  hold  crops in public warehouses  and
issue loans on their value until they could be profitably
sold. When Democrats — still wary of big-government
schemes — declared  the  idea  too  radical,  Alliances  in
Texas,  Kansas,  South  Dakota,  and  elsewhere  decided
to create a new political party, the Populists (see Chap-
ter  20).  In  this  venture,  the  Alliance  cooperated  with
the  weakened  Knights  of  Labor,  seeking  to  use  rural
vot ers’  substantial  clout  on  behalf  of  urban  workers
who shared their vision.

By  this  time,  farmer-labor  coalitions  had  made  a
considerable impact on state politics. But state laws and
commissions were proving ineffective against corpora-
tions of national and even global scope. It was difficult
for Wisconsin, for instance, to enforce new laws against
a  railroad  company  whose  lines  might  stretch  from
Chicago to Seattle and whose corporate headquarters
might  be  in  Minnesota.  Militant  farmers  and  labor
advocates demanded federal action.

In 1887, responding to this pressure, Congress and
President Grover Cleveland passed two landmark laws.
The Hatch Act provided federal funding for agricultural

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
Why did farmers and
industrial workers
cooperate, and what
political objectives did
they achieve?

research  and  education,  meeting
farmers’ demands for government
aid  to  agriculture.  The  Interstate
Com merce  Act  counteracted  a
Supreme  Court  decision  of  the
previous  year,  Wabash  v.  Illinois
(1886),  that  had  struck  down
states’  authority  to  regulate  rail-
roads.  The  act  created  the  Interstate  Commerce
Commission  (ICC),  charged  with  investigating  inter-
state  shipping,  forcing  railroads  to  make  their  rates
public,  and  suing  in  court  when  necessary  to  make
companies reduce “unjust or unreasonable” rates.

Though creation of the ICC was a direct response
to farmer-labor demands, its final form represented a
compromise.  Radical  leaders  wanted  Congress  to
establish  a  direct  set  of  rules  under  which  railroads
must operate. If a railroad did not comply, any citizen
could take the company to court; if the new rules trig-
gered bankruptcy, the railroad could convert to public
ownership. But getting such a plan through Congress
proved  impossible.  Lawmakers  more  sympathetic  to
business  called  instead  for  an  expert  commission  to
oversee the railroad industry. In a pattern that repeated
frequently over the next few decades, the commission
model  proved  more  acceptable  to  the  majority  of
congressmen.

The ICC faced formidable challenges. Though the
new  law  forbade  railroads  from  reaching  secret  rate-
setting agreements, evidence was difficult to gather and
secret  “pooling”  continued.  A  hostile  Supreme  Court
also undermined the commission’s powers. In a series
of  sixteen  decisions  over  the  two  decades  after  the
ICC was created, the Court sided with railroads fifteen
times. The justices delivered a particularly hard blow in
1897  when  they  ruled  that  the  ICC  had  no  power  to
interfere  with  shipping  rates.  Nonetheless,  the  ICC’s
existence was a major achievement. In the early twen-
tieth century, Congress would strengthen the commis-
sion’s powers, and the ICC would become one of the
most powerful federal agencies charged with oversee-
ing private business.

Another Path: The American
Federation of Labor
While the Knights of Labor exerted political pressure,
other workers pursued a different strategy. In the 1870s,
printers,  ironworkers,  bricklayers,  and  other  skilled
workers  organized  nationwide  trade  unions.  These
“brotherhoods”  focused  on  the  everyday  needs  of
workers  in  skilled  occupations.  Trade  unions  sought

