570

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

the separate American Federation of Labor (AFL). The
man  who  led  them  was  Samuel  Gompers,  a  Dutch-
Jewish  cigar  maker  whose  family  had  emigrated  to
New York in 1863. Gompers headed the AFL  for the
next  thirty  years.  He  believed  the  Knights  relied  too
much on electoral politics, where victories were likely
to be limited, and he did not share their sweeping cri-
tique  of  capitalism.  The  AFL,  made  up  of  relatively
skilled  and  well-paid  workers,  was  less  interested  in
challenging  the  corporate  order  than  in  winning  a
larger share of its rewards.

Having gone to work at age ten, Gompers always
contended that what he missed at school he more than
made up for in the shop, where cigar makers paid one
of their members to read to them while they worked.
As a young worker-intellectual, Gompers gravitated to
New  York’s  radical  circles,  where  he  participated  in
lively  debates  about  which  strategies  workingmen
should pursue. Partly out of these debates, and partly
from his own experience in the Cigar Makers Union,
Gompers  hammered  out  a  doctrine  that  he  called
pure-and-simple unionism. Pure referred to member-
ship: strictly limited to workers, organized by craft and
occupation,  with  no  reliance  on  outside  advisors  or
allies. Simple referred to goals: only those that imme-
diately benefitted workers — better wages, hours, and
working  conditions.  Pure-and-simple  unionists  dis-
trusted  politics.  Their  aim  was  collective  bargaining
with employers.

On  one  level,  pure-and-simple  unionism  worked.
The AFL was small at first, but by 1904 its membership
rose to more than two million. In the early twentieth
century, it became the nation’s leading voice for workers,
lasting far longer than movements like the Knights of
Labor. The AFL’s strategy — personified by Gompers —
was well suited to an era when Congress and the courts
were hostile to labor. By the 1910s, the political climate
would become more responsive; at that later moment,
Gompers would soften his antipolitical stance and join
the battle for new labor laws (Chapter 20).

What  Gompers  gave  up  most  crucially,  in  the
meantime,  was  the  inclusiveness  of  the  Knights.  By
comparison, the AFL was far less welcoming to women
and blacks; it included mostly skilled craftsmen. There
was little room in the AFL for department-store clerks
and other service workers, much less the farm tenants
and  domestic  servants  whom  the  Knights  had  orga-
nized. Despite the AFL’s success among skilled crafts-
men,  the  narrowness  of  its  base  was  a  problem  that
would come back to haunt the labor movement later
on. Gompers, however, saw that corporate titans and
their  political  allies  held  tremendous  power,  and  he

Samuel Gompers, c. 1890s

Samuel Gompers (1850–1924) was one of the founders of
the American Federation of Labor, and its president for nearly
forty years. A company detective took this photograph when
the labor leader was visiting striking miners in West Virginia,
an area where mine operators resisted unions with special
ﬁerceness. George Meany Memorial Archives.

a  closed  shop — with  all  jobs  reserved  for  union
members — that kept out lower-wage workers. Union
rules  specified  terms  of  work,  sometimes  in  minute
detail. Many unions emphasized mutual aid. Because
working on the railroads was a high-risk occupation,
for  example,  brotherhoods  of  engineers,  brakemen,
and  firemen  pooled  contributions  into  funds  that
provided  accident  and  death  benefits.  Above  all,
trade unionism asserted craft workers’ rights as active
decision-makers in the workplace,
not  just  cogs  in  a  management-
run machine.

In the early 1880s, many trade
unionists  joined  the  Knights  of
Labor coalition. But the aftermath
of  the  Haymarket  violence  per-
suaded  them  to  leave  and  create

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did the key institu-
tions and goals of the
labor movement change,
and what gains and losses
resulted from this shift?

