572

PART 6

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  How did the rise of big business in the United States
transform the economy and affect the lives of work-
ing people?

2.  How  did  patterns  of  immigration  to  the  United
States  change  between  the  1840s  and  the  1910s?
What  roles  did  newly  arrived  immigrants  play  in
the economy during the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries?

3.  Compare  the  accomplishments  and  limitations  of
American  farmer-labor  movements  of  the  1870s
and 1880s, such as the Greenback-Labor Party and
the Knights of Labor, with those of the American
Federation  of  Labor.  Why  did  the  latter  choose  a
different strategy?

4.  This  chapter  explores  the  impact  of  industrializa-
tion from many points of view. Based on this infor-
mation, do you think the term industrial statesmen
or robber barons is more accurate as a description
for  Andrew  Carnegie,  John  D.  Rockefeller,  and
other early titans? Or would you prefer a different
term? Explain why.

5.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events listed under “Politics and Power,” “Peopling,”
and “Work, Exchange, and Tech nology” on the the-
matic timeline on page 543. Industriali zation was
an  economic  process,  but  it  also  transformed
American society and politics. How?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  Imagine a con-
versation in the 1890s between a young brother and
sister in Chicago, who are working, respectively, in
a meat-packing plant and as a telephone operator,
and their grandmother, who as a young girl worked
in a Lowell, Massachusetts, textile mill in the 1840s
(Chapter 9) before the family moved west to take
advantage of new opportunities. What similarities
and  differences  might  they  see  in  their  various
experiences of work? What does this tell us about
changes in workers’ lives over these decades?

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  Return  to  the  chapter-
opening photograph (p. 545), taken in the aftermath

of  a  terrible  mining  accident  in  Pennsylvania.
Imagine, first, that the young man in the middle of
the picture, facing the camera, is the nephew of an
Irish immigrant miner who was killed in the explo-
sion. In the voice of this young man, write a letter to
the  editor  of  the  local  paper  explaining  what  les-
sons Americans should take from the disaster.

Now imagine instead that the young man has
enrolled in business school to become a manager;
he  is  the  son  of  a  Scottish-born  executive  in  the
mining company, and Andrew Carnegie is his hero.
In the voice of this young man, write a letter to the
editor  explaining  what  lessons  Americans  should
take from the disaster.

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Roger Daniels, Coming to America (2002). A sweeping
overview of immigration to the United States from
colonial times to the 1980s.

Walter Friedman, Birth of a Salesman (2004). A lively
treatment of the rise of salesmanship.

Erika Lee, At America’s Gates (2003). One of several
superb recent treatments of Chinese immigration and
exclusion.

Harold Livesay, Samuel Gompers and Organized Labor
in America (1978). A classic biography of the AFL’s
founder.

David Montgomery, Citizen Worker (1993). A brief
exploration of workers’ experiences with government,
electoral politics, and the marketplace in the late
nineteenth century.

Richard White, Railroaded (2011). A recent reassess-
ment of big business and its impact, focusing on the
railroad industry.

