The Victorians Make the Modern
1880–1917

When  Philadelphia  hosted  the

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
How  did  the  changes  wrought  by
industrialization  shape  Americans’
identities, beliefs, and culture?

1876  Centennial  Exposition,
Americans  weren’t  sure  what
to  expect  from  their  ﬁrst  world’s  fair —
including  what  foods  exhibitors  would
offer. One cartoonist humorously proposed that Russians would serve castor oil, Arabs
would bring camel’s milk punch, and Germans would offer beer. Reﬂecting widespread
racial prejudices, the cartoon showed Chinese men selling “hashed cat” and “rat pie.”
In  reality,  though,  the  1876  Exposition  offered  only  plain  lunchrooms  and,  for  the
wealthiest visitors, expensive French fare.

By the early twentieth century, American food had undergone a revolution. Visitors
to the St. Louis World’s Fair in 1904 could try food from Scandinavia, India, and the
Philippines. Across the United States, Chinese American restaurants ﬂourished as a chop
suey craze swept the nation. New Yorkers could sample Hungarian and Syrian cuisine;
a San Francisco journalist enthusiastically reviewed local Mexican and Japanese restau-
rants. Even small-town diners could often ﬁnd an Italian or German meal.

What  had  happened?  Americans  had  certainly  not  lost  all  their  prejudices:  while
plates of chop suey were being gobbled up, laws excluding Chinese immigrants remained
ﬁrmly in place. Industrialization reshaped class identities, however, and promoted a cre-
ative  consumer  culture.  In  the  great  cities,  amusement  parks  and  vaudeville  theaters
catered to industrial workers (Chapter 19). Other institutions served middle-class cus-
tomers who wanted novelty and variety at a reasonable price. A Victorian ethos of self-
restraint and moral uplift gave way to expectations of leisure and fun. As African Amer-
icans and women claimed a right to public spaces — to shop, dine, and travel freely — they
built powerful reform movements. At the same time, the new pressures faced by profes-
sional men led to aggressive calls for masculine ﬁtness, exempliﬁed by the rise of sports.
Stunning scientiﬁc discoveries — from dinosaur fossils to distant galaxies — also chal-
lenged  long-held  beliefs.  Faced  with  electricity,  medical  vaccines,  and  other  wonders,
Americans  celebrated  technological  solutions  to  human  problems.  But  while  science
gained popularity, religion hardly faded. In fact, religious diversity grew, as immigrants
brought new faiths and Protestants responded with innovations of their own. Ameri-
cans  found  themselves  living  in  a  modern  world — one  in  which  their  grandparents’
beliefs  and  ways  of  life  no  longer  seemed  to  apply.  In  a  market-driven  society  that
claimed to champion individual freedom, Americans took advantage of new ideas while
expressing anxiety over the accompanying upheavals and risks.

18

C H A P T E R

COMMERCE AND
CULTURE

Consumer Spaces

Masculinity and the Rise

of Sports

The Great Outdoors

WOMEN, MEN, AND THE
SOLITUDE OF SELF
Changes in Family Life

Education

From Domesticity to Women’s

Rights

SCIENCE AND FAITH
Darwinism and Its Critics

Realism in the Arts

Religion: Diversity and

Innovation

574

