576

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

Commerce and Culture
As  the  United  States  industrialized,  the  terms  middle
class and working class came widely into use. Americans
adopted  these  broad  identities  not  only  in  the  work-
place but also in their leisure time. Professionals and
corporate managers prospered; they and their families
enjoyed rising income and an array of tempting ways
to spend their dollars. Celebrating these new techno-
logical wonders, Americans hailed inventors as heroes.
The most famous, Thomas Edison, operated an inde-
pendent laboratory rather than working for a corpora-
tion. Edison, like many of the era’s businessmen, was a
shrewd entrepreneur who focused on commercial suc-
cess.  He  and  his  colleagues  helped  introduce  such
lucrative  products  as  the  incandescent  lightbulb  and
the phonograph, which came widely into use in Ameri-
can homes.

Even  working-class  Americans  enjoyed  cheaper
products delivered by global trade and mass produc-
tion,  from  bananas  and  cigarettes  to  colorful  dime
novels  and  magazines.  Edison’s  moving  pictures,  for
example, first found popularity among the urban work-
ing class (Chapter 19). Consumer culture appeared, at
least, to be democratic: anyone should be able to eat at
a restaurant or buy a rail ticket for the “ladies’ car” — as
long  as  she  or  he  could  pay.  In  practice,  though,  this
was not the case, and consumer venues became sites of
struggle over class inequality, race privilege, and proper
male and female behavior.

Consumer Spaces
America’s  public  spaces — from  election  polls  to
saloons and circus shows — had long been boisterous
and  male-centered.  A  woman  who  ventured  there

Pacific Railway Poster, c. 1900

This color lithograph emphasized
the family atmosphere of the rail-
road’s Pullman Palace Dining Cars.
Pullman, a Chicago-based manufac-
turer, became a household name by
providing high-class sleeping and
dining cars to the nation’s railroads.
Such advertisements invited prosper-
ous Americans to make themselves
“at home” in public, commercial
spaces that were safe and comfort-
able for respectable women and
children. Note that all the passen-
gers are white, and the waiters
black. Work as a railroad waiter or
porter was one of the better-paid,
more prestigious jobs available to
African American men. Demands
for segregated rail cars often
focused on the alleged threat
that black men might pose to
white women — while, at the
same time, such men and
women regularly came in con-
tact as railroad employees and
passengers. Wisconsin Historical
Society.

