CHAPTER 18

  The Victorians Make the Modern, 1880–1917

577

without a male chaperone risked damaging her reputa-
tion. But the rise of new businesses encouraged change.
To attract an eager public, purveyors of consumer cul-
ture  invited  women  and  families,  especially  those  of
the  middle  class,  to  linger  in  department  stores  and
enjoy new amusements.

No  one  promoted  commercial  domesticity  more
successfully than showman P. T. Barnum (1810–1891),
who  used  the  country’s  expanding  rail  network  to
develop  his  famous  traveling  circus.  Barnum  con-
demned earlier circus managers who had opened their
tents to “the rowdy element.” Proclaiming children as
his key audience, he created family entertainment for
diverse  audiences  (though  in  the  South,  black  audi-
ences  sat  in  segregated  seats  or  attended  separate
shows). He promised middle-class parents that his cir-
cus  would  teach  children  courage  and  promote  the
benefits of exercise. To encourage women’s attendance,
Barnum emphasized the respectability and refinement
of his female performers.

Department stores also lured middle-class women
by offering tearooms, children’s play areas, umbrellas,
and  clerks  to  wrap  and  carry  every  purchase.  Store
credit plans enabled well-to-do women to shop with-
out handling money in public. Such tactics succeeded
so well that New York’s department store district became
known as Ladies’ Mile. Boston department store mag-
nate  William  Filene  called  the  department  store  an
“Adamless Eden.”

These  Edens  were  for  the  elite  and  middle  class.
Though  bargain  basements  and  neighborhood  stores
served  working-class  families,  big  department  stores
enlisted  vagrancy  laws  and  police  to  discourage  the
“wrong  kind”  from  entering.  Working-class  women
gained  access  primarily  as  clerks,  cashiers,  and  cash
girls, who at age twelve or younger served as internal
store messengers, carrying orders and change for $1.50
a  week. The  department  store  was  no  Eden  for  these
women,  who  worked  long  hours  on  their  feet,  often
dealing  with  difficult  customers.  Nevertheless,  many
clerks claimed their own privileges as shoppers, mak-
ing enthusiastic use of employee discounts and battling
employers for the right to wear their fashionable pur-
chases while they worked in the store.

In  similar  ways,  class  status  was  marked  by  the
ways technology entered American homes. The rise of
electricity, in particular, marked the gap between afflu-
ent urban consumers and rural and working-class fam-
ilies. In elite houses, domestic servants began to use —
or find themselves replaced by — an array of new devices,
from  washing  machines  to  vacuum  cleaners.  When
Alexander  Graham  Bell  invented  the  telephone  in

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did new consumer
practices, arising from
industrialization, reshape
Americans’ gender, class,
and race relationships?

1876,  entrepreneurs  introduced
the device for business use, but it
soon found eager residential cus-
tomers.  Telephones  changed  eti-
quette  and  social  relations  for
middle-class suburban women —
while  providing  their  working-
class  counterparts  with  new
employment options (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 578).
Railroads also reflected the emerging privileges of
professional  families.  Finding  prosperous  Americans
eager for excursions, railroad companies, like depart-
ment stores, made things comfortable for middle-class
women and children. Boston’s South Terminal Station
boasted of its modern amenities, including “everything
that  the  traveler  needs  down  to  cradles  in  which  the
baby may be soothed.” An 1882 tourist guide promised
readers  that  they  could  live  on  the  Pacific  Railroad
“with  as  much  true  enjoyment  as  the  home  drawing
room.” Rail cars manufactured by the famous Pullman
Company of Chicago set a national standard for taste
and elegance. Fitted with rich carpets, upholstery, and
woodwork, Pullman cars embodied the growing pros-
perity  of  America’s  elite,  influencing  trends  in  home
decor. Part of their appeal was the chance for people of
modest  means  to  emulate  the  rich.  An  experienced
train conductor observed that the wives of grocers, not
millionaires, were the ones most likely to “sweep . . . into
a  parlor  car  as  if  the  very  carpet  ought  to  feel  highly
honored by their tread.”

First-class  “ladies’  cars”  soon  became  sites  of
struggle for racial equality. For three decades after the
end  of  the  Civil  War,  state  laws  and  railroad  regula-
tions varied, and African Americans often succeeded
in securing seats. One reformer noted, however, “There
are  few  ordeals  more  nerve-wracking  than  the  one
which  confronts  a  colored  woman  when  she  tries  to
secure a Pullman reservation in the South and even in
some parts of the North.” When they claimed first-class
seats,  black  women  often  faced  confrontations  with
conductors,  resulting  in  numerous  lawsuits  in  the
1870s and 1880s. Riding the Chesapeake & Ohio line
in  1884,  young  African  American  journalist  Ida  B.
Wells was told to leave. “I refused,” she wrote later, “say-
ing that the [nearest alternative] car was a smoker, and
as  I  was  in  the  ladies’  car,  I  proposed  to  stay.”  Wells
resisted,  but  the  conductor  and  a  baggage  handler
threw  her  bodily  off  the  train.  Returning  home  to
Memphis,  Wells  sued  and  won  in  local  courts,  but
Tennessee’s supreme court reversed the ruling.

In 1896, the U.S. Supreme Court settled such issues
decisively — but not justly. The case, Plessy v. Ferguson,

