T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

America Picks Up

the Telephone

New consumer technologies often had different impacts on working-class and
rural Americans than they did on the prosperous elite and the middle class. The
documents below also suggest some of the ways that telephone use reﬂected
new expectations about women’s roles in the home, workplace, and society.

1.  “Hello Ma Baby” sheet music cover and lyrics,

2.  “The Perfect Operator,” Saturday Evening Post,

1899. This popular music hit, this song was written
in the voice of an African American man to his girl.
The man’s tuxedo is a bit disheveled; in 1899, most
white Americans would have assumed he wore
it for waiting tables or other service work. The
woman wears a dressing gown — not how a
respectable lady would want to appear. Nonethe-
less, the racial depiction here is more modern than
those of old-fashioned minstrel shows. The song’s
chorus appears below. What changing expectations
does it convey about courtship and dating?

Courtesy of the E. Azalia Hackley Collection of Negro Music, Dance and
Drama, Detroit Public Library.

Hello! ma Baby, Hello! ma honey, Hello! ma ragtime

gal,

Send me a kiss by wire, Baby, my heart’s on fire!
If you refuse me, honey, you’ll lose me, then you’ll be

left alone;

Oh baby, telephone, and tell me I’m your own.

578

July 12, 1930. Katherine Schmitt opened the New
York Operator’s School in 1902. Looking back later,
she described the qualities sought in operators.
What does this document tell us about the values
of the emerging corporate workplace?

[The operator] must now be made as nearly as possible
a paragon of perfection, a kind of human machine, the
exponent of speed and courtesy; a creature spirited
enough to move like chain lightning, and with perfect
accuracy; docile enough to deny herself the sweet privi-
lege of the last word. She must assume that the subscriber
is always right, and even when she knows he is not, her
only comeback must be: “Excuse it please,” in the same
smiling voice.

3.  “The Mischievous Telephone Girl Makes More

Trouble,” Wheeling Register, West Virginia, Octo-
ber 26, 1884. Early operators had to speak to each
caller and manually connect the call. Newspapers
in the 1880s featured many stories like this one.
Telephone companies predominantly hired young
white native-born women as operators, or “hello
girls.” Many such employees came from the work-
ing class.

The girl had been asleep a long time, when somebody
called. Looking at the switch board, she observed that
No. 1,111 was down, and leisurely raised the phone to her
ear. . . . “Hello! . . . You bald headed old sinner! What do
you want?”

“Dr. Highflyer. No. 2,222.”
“Hello!”
“Hello, Highflyer! My wife is not very well to-night.
She has a severe pain in the back of her neck, and com-
plains of a sort of goneness in the abdomen. . . . What
shall I do for her?”

Here the wicked telephone girl switched on a machin-

ist who was telling the owner of a saw mill what he
thought ailed his boiler and the answer . . . was as follows:
“I think she’s covered with scales inside about an inch
thick. Let her cool down during the night, and before she
fires up in the morning, take a hammer and pound her

