580

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

Jim Crow laws applied to public schools and parks
and also to emerging commercial spaces — hotels, res-
taurants, streetcars, trains, and eventually sports stadi-
ums  and  movie  theaters.  Placing  a  national  stamp  of
approval on segregation, the Plessy decision remained
in place until 1954, when the Court’s Brown v. Topeka
Board of Education ruling finally struck it down. Until
then, blacks’ exclusion from first-class “public accom-
modations” was one of the most painful marks of rac-
ism.  The  Plessy  decision,  like  the  rock-bottom  wages
earned by twelve-year-old girls at Macy’s, showed that
consumer  culture  could  be  modern  and  innovative
without  being  politically  progressive.  Business  and
consumer  culture  were  shaped  by,  and  themselves
shaped, racial and class injustices.

Masculinity and the Rise of Sports
While  industrialization  spawned  public  domesticity —
a consumer culture that courted affluent women and
families — it also changed expectations for men in the
workplace.  Traditionally,  the  mark  of  a  successful
American  man  was  economic  independence:  he  was
his own boss. Now, tens of thousands worked for other
men  in  big  companies — and  in  offices,  rather  than
using their muscles. Would the professional American
male,  through  his  concentration  on  “brain  work,”
become “weak, effeminate, [and] decaying,” as one edi-
tor  warned?  How  could  well-to-do  men  assert  their
independence  if  work  no  longer  required  them  to
prove themselves physically? How could they develop
toughness and strength? One answer was athletics.

“Muscular  Christianity”  The  Young  Men’s  Christ-
ian  Association  (YMCA)  was  one  of  the  earliest  and
most  successful  promoters  of  athletic  fitness.  Intro-
duced in Boston in 1851, the group promoted muscu-
lar Christianity, combining evangelism with gyms and
athletic  facilities  where  men  could  make  themselves
“clean and strong.” Focusing first on white-collar work-
ers, the YMCA developed a substantial industrial pro-
gram after 1900. Railroad managers and other corpo-
rate  titans  hoped  YMCAs  would  foster  a  loyal  and
contented workforce, discouraging labor unrest. Busi-
ness leaders also relied on sports to build physical and
mental discipline and help men adjust their bodies to
the demands of the industrial clock. Sports honed men’s
competitive spirit, they believed; employer-sponsored
teams instilled teamwork and company pride.

Working-class  men  had  their  own  ideas  about
sports and leisure, and YMCAs quickly became a site
of negotiation. Could workers come to the “Y” to play

Horatio Alger Jr.

In dozens of popular boys’ books published between 1867
and 1917, Horatio Alger Jr. assured young readers that if
they were honest, worked hard, and cultivated good char-
acter, they could succeed in the new competitive economy.
His heroes, such as the famous “Ragged Dick,” often grew
up in poverty on the streets of big cities. Brave and Bold
(1874) told the story of a small-town boy forced to work
in a factory; he is unfairly ﬁred, but through persistence
and courage he wins a good job and recovers an inheri-
tance for his mother. Alger’s books were republished often,
as in this boys’ magazine from 1911, and many remain in
print today. Courtesy Stanford University Archives.

was  brought  by  civil  rights  advocates  on  behalf  of
Homer Plessy, a New Orleans resident who was one-
eighth  black.  Ordered  to  leave  a  first-class  car  and
move to the “colored” car of a Louisiana train, Plessy
refused  and  was  arrested.  The  Court  ruled  that  such
segregation did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment
as  long as blacks had access to accommodations that
were “separate but equal” to those of whites. “Separate
but equal” was a myth: segregated facilities in the South
were  flagrantly  inferior.  Jim  Crow  segregation  laws,
named for a stereotyped black character who appeared
in minstrel shows, clearly discriminated, but the Court
allowed them to stand.

