CHAPTER 18

  The Victorians Make the Modern, 1880–1917

581

billiards or cards? Could they smoke? At first, YMCA
leaders said no, but to attract working-class men they
had to make concessions. As a result, the “Y” became a
place  where  middle-class  and  working-class  customs
blended — or  existed  in  uneasy  tension.  At  the  same
time,  YMCA  leaders  innovated.  Searching  for  winter
activities in the 1890s, YMCA instructors invented the
new indoor games of basketball and volleyball.

For  elite  Americans,  meanwhile,  country  clubs
flourished; both men and women could enjoy tennis,
golf, and swimming facilities as well as social gather-
ings.  By  the  turn  of  the  century — perhaps  because
country  club  women  were  encroaching  on  their  ath-
letic  turf — elite  men  took  up  even  more  aggressive
physical  sports,  including  boxing,  weightlifting,  and
martial arts. As early as 1890, future president Theodore
Roosevelt  argued  that  such  “virile”  activities  were
essential  to  “maintain  and  defend  this  very  civiliza-
tion.”  “Most  masterful  nations,”  he  claimed,  “have
shown a strong taste for manly sports.” Roosevelt, son
of a wealthy New York family, became one of the first
American  devotees  of  jujitsu.  During  his  presidency
(1901–1909), he designated a judo room in the White
House  and  hired  an  expert  Japanese  instructor.
Roosevelt also wrestled and boxed, urging other Ameri-
can men — especially among the elite — to increase their
leadership fitness by pursuing the “strenuous life.”

To see a longer excerpt of Theodore Roosevelt’s
views on sports, along with other primary sources
from this period, see Sources for America’s History.

America’s Game  Before the 1860s, the only distinc-
tively American game was Native American lacrosse,
and  the  most  popular  team  sport  among  European
Americans was cricket. After the Civil War, however,
team sports became a fundamental part of American
manhood,  none  more  successfully  than  baseball.  A
derivative of cricket, the game’s formal rules had begun
to  develop  in  New  York  in  the  1840s  and  1850s.  Its
popularity  spread  in  military  camps  during  the  Civil
War.  Afterward,  the  idea  that  baseball  “received  its
baptism in the bloody days of our Nation’s direst dan-
ger,” as one promoter put it, became part of the game’s
mythology.

Until the 1870s, most amateur players were clerks
and white-collar workers who had leisure to play and
the  income  to  buy  their  own  uniforms.  Business
frowned  on  baseball  and  other  sports  as  a  waste
of  time,  especially  for  working-class  men.  But  late-
nineteenth-century  employers  came  to  see  baseball,
like other athletic pursuits, as a benefit for workers. It

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How and why did Ameri-
can sports evolve, and
how did athletics soften or
sharpen social divisions?

provided  fresh  air  and  exercise,
kept men out of saloons, and pro-
moted  discipline  and  teamwork.
Players  on  company-sponsored
teams,  wearing  uniforms  embla-
zoned  with
their  employers’
names, began to compete on paid
work  time.  Baseball  thus  set  a  pattern  for  how  other
American  sports  developed.  Begun  among  indepen-
dent craftsmen, it was taken up by elite men anxious to
prove their strength and fitness. Well-to-do Americans
then decided the sport could benefit the working class.
Big-time  professional  baseball  arose  with  the
launching of the National League in 1876. The league
quickly built more than a dozen teams in large cities,
from  the  Brooklyn  Trolley  Dodgers  to  the  Cleveland
Spiders. Team  owners were, in their own right, profit-
minded entrepreneurs who shaped the sport to please
consumers.  Wooden  grandstands  soon  gave  way  to
concrete  and  steel  stadiums.  By  1900,  boys  collected
lithographed  cards  of  their  favorite  players,  and  the
baseball  cap  came  into  fashion.  In  1903,  the  Boston
Americans defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates in the first
World Series. American men could now adopt a new
consumer identity — not as athletes, but as fans.

Rise of the Negro Leagues  Baseball stadiums, like
first-class rail cars, were sites of racial negotiation and
conflict.  In  the  1880s  and  1890s,  major  league  man-
agers  hired  a  few  African  American  players.  As  late
as  1901,  the  Baltimore  Orioles  succeeded  in  sign-
ing  Charlie  Grant,  a  light-skinned  black  player  from
Cin cin nati,  by  renaming  him Charlie  Tokohoma  and
claiming  he  was  Cherokee.  But  as  this  subterfuge
suggested,  black  players  were  increasingly  barred.  A
Toledo  team  received  a  threatening  note  before  one
game  in  Richmond,  Virginia:  if  their  “negro  catcher”
played, he would be lynched. Toledo put a substitute on
the field, and at the end of the season the club termi-
nated the black player’s contract.

Shut out of white leagues, players and fans turned
to all-black professional teams, where black men could
showcase athletic ability and race pride. Louisiana’s top
team, the New Orleans Pinchbacks, pointedly named
themselves after the state’s black Reconstruction gover-
nor. By the early 1900s, such teams organized into sep-
arate  Negro  Leagues.  Though  players  suffered  from
erratic pay and rundown ball fields, the leagues thrived
until the desegregation of baseball after World War II.
In an era of stark discrimination, they celebrated black
manhood and talent. “I liked the way their uniform fit,
the way they wore their cap,” wrote an admiring fan of

