582

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

the  Newark  Eagles.  “They  showed  a  style  in  almost
everything they did.”

American Football  The most controversial sport of
the  industrializing  era  was  football,  which  began  at
elite colleges during the 1880s. The great powerhouse
was  the  Yale  team,  whose  legendary  coach  Walter
Camp  went  on  to  become  a  watch  manufacturer.
Between 1883 and 1891, under Camp’s direction, Yale
scored 4,660 points; its opponents scored 92. Drawing
on  the  workplace  model  of  scientific  management,
Camp  emphasized  drill  and  precision.  He  and  other
coaches  argued  that  football  offered  perfect  training
for  the  competitive  world  of  business.  The  game  was
violent: six players’ deaths in the 1908  college season
provoked  a  public  outcry.  Eventually,  new  rules  pro-
tected  quarterbacks  and  required  coaches  to  remove

injured players from the game. But such measures were
adopted grudgingly, with supporters arguing that they
ruined football’s benefits in manly training.

Like  baseball  and  the  YMCA,  football  attracted
sponsorship  from  business  leaders  hoping  to  divert
workers  from  labor  activism.  The  first  professional
teams emerged in western Pennsylvania’s steel towns,
soon  after  the  defeat  of  the  steelworkers’  union. Car-
negie Steel executives organized teams in Homestead
and  Braddock;  the  first  league  appeared  during  the
anthracite coal strike of 1902. Other teams arose in the
midwestern  industrial  heartland.  The  Indian-Acme
Packing Company sponsored the Green Bay Packers;
the future Chicago Bears, first known as the Decatur
Staleys,  were  funded  by  a  manufacturer  of  laundry
starch.  Like  its  baseball  equivalent,  professional  foot-
ball encouraged men to buy in as spectators and fans.

Football Practice, Chilocco Indian School, 1911

Football became widely popular, spreading from Ivy League schools and state universities to schools like this
one, built on Cherokee land in Oklahoma. The uniforms of this team, typical of the day, show very limited
padding and protection — a factor that contributed to high rates of injury and even death on the ﬁeld. As
they practiced in 1911, these Chilocco students had an inspiring model to look up to: in that year Jim
Thorpe, a fellow Oklahoman and a member of the Sac and Fox tribe, was winning national fame by leading
the all-Indian team at Pennsylvania’s Carlisle School to victory against Harvard. Thorpe, one of the ﬁnest ath-
letes of his generation, went on to win gold medals in the pentathlon and decathlon at the 1912 Olympics in
Stockholm, Sweden. National Archives.

