CHAPTER 18

  The Victorians Make the Modern, 1880–1917

583

The Great Outdoors
As  the  rise  of  sports  suggests,  elite  and  middle-class
Americans  began  by  the  1880s  and  1890s  to  see
Victorian  culture  as  stuffy  and  claustrophobic.  They
revolted  by  heading  outdoors.  A  craze  for  bicycling
swept the country; in 1890, at the height of the mania,
U.S.  manufacturers  sold  an  astonishing  ten  million
bikes. Women were not far behind men in taking up
athletics.  By  the  1890s,  even  elite  women,  long  con-
fined to corsets and heavy clothes that restricted their
movement, donned lighter dresses and pursued archery
and golf. Artist Charles Gibson became famous for his
portraits of the Gibson Girl, an elite beauty depicted on
the tennis court or swimming at the beach. The Gibson
Girl personified the ideal of “New Women,” more edu-
cated, athletic, and independent than their mothers.

Those  with  money  and  leisure  time  used  railroad
networks  to  get  to  the  national  parks  of  the  West,
which, as one senator put it, became a “breathing-place
for the national lungs.” People of more modest means
began to take up camping. As early as 1904, California’s
Coronado Beach offered tent rentals for $3 a week. A
decade later, campgrounds and cottages in many parts
of the country catered to a working-class clientele. In
an industrial society, the outdoors became associated
with leisure and renewal rather than danger and hard
work. One journalist, reflecting on urban life from the
vantage point of a western vacation, wrote, “How stu-
pid it all seems: the mad eagerness of money-making
men,  the  sham  pleasures  of  conventional  society.”  In
the  wilderness,  he  wrote,  “your  blood  clarifies;  your
brain becomes active. You get a new view of life.”

As  Americans  searched  for  such  renewal  in  rem-
nants  of  unexploited  land,  the  nation’s  first  environ-
mental  movement  arose.  John  Muir,  who  fell  in  love
with  the  Yosemite  Valley  in  1869,  became  the  most
famous  voice  for  wilderness.  Raised  in  a  stern  Scots
Presbyterian family on a Wisconsin farm, Muir knew
much  of  the  Bible  by  heart.  He  was  a  keen  observer
who developed a deeply spiritual relationship with the
natural world. His contemporary Mary Austin, whose
book Land of Little Rain (1905) celebrated the austere
beauty  of  the  California  desert,  called  him  “a  devout
man.” In cooperation with his editor at Century maga-
zine,  Muir  founded  the  Sierra  Club  in  1892.  Like  the
earlier Appalachian Mountain Club, founded in Boston
in 1876, the Sierra Club dedicated itself to preserving
and enjoying America’s great mountains.

Encouraged  by  such  groups,  national  and  state
governments set aside more public lands for preserva-
tion  and  recreation.  The  United  States  substantially

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What changes in American
society precipitated the
rise of national parks and
monuments?

expanded  its  park  system  and,
during  Theodore  Roosevelt’s
presidency,  extended  the  reach
of national forests. Starting in 1872
with  the  preservation  of  Yellow-
stone in Wyom ing, Congress had
begun  to  set  aside  land  for  national  parks.  In  1916,
President  Woodrow  Wilson  provided  comprehensive
oversight of these national parks, signing an act creat-
ing the National Park Service (Map 18.1). A year later,
the  system  numbered  thirteen  parks — including
Maine’s Acadia, the first east of the Mississippi River.

Environmentalists also worked to protect wildlife.
By the 1890s, several state Audubon Societies, named
in honor of antebellum naturalist John James Audubon,
banded  together  to  advocate  broader  protections  for
wild birds, especially herons and egrets that were being
slaughtered  by  the  thousands  for  their  plumes.  They
succeeded  in  winning  the  Lacey  Act  (1900),  which
established federal penalties for selling specified birds,
animals,  and  plants.  Soon  afterward,  state  organiza-
tions  joined  together  to  form  the  National  Audubon
Society. Women played prominent roles in the move-
ment,  promoting  boycotts  of  hats  with  plumage.  In
1903,  President  Theodore  Roosevelt  created  the  first
National Wildlife Refuge at Pelican Island, Florida.

Roosevelt  also  expanded  preservation  under  the
Antiquities Act (1906), which enabled the U.S. presi-
dent,  without  congressional  approval,  to  set  aside
“objects of historic and scientific interest” as  national
monuments.  Two  years  later,  Roosevelt  used  these
powers to preserve 800,000 acres at Arizona’s magnifi-
cent Grand Canyon. The act proved a mixed blessing
for conservation. Monuments received weaker protec-
tion  than  national  parks  did;  many  fell  under  the
authority  of  the  U.S.  Forest  Service,  which  permitted
logging and grazing. Business interests thus lobbied to
have  coveted  lands  designated  as  monuments  rather
than national parks so they could more easily exploit
resources. Nonetheless, the creation of national monu-
ments offered some protection, and many monuments
(such  as  Alaska’s  Katmai)  later  obtained  park  status.
The  expanding  network  of  parks  and  monuments
became popular places to hike, camp, and contemplate
natural beauty.

The great outdoors provided new opportunities for
women with the means to travel. One writer, advising
women  to  enjoy  mountain hikes,  hinted  at  liberating
possibilities:  “For  those  loving  freedom  and  health,”
he  recommended  “short  skirts,  pantlets,  stout  shoes,
tasty hat.” And like other leisure venues, “wilderness”
did not remain in the hands of elite men and women.

