CHAPTER 18

  The Victorians Make the Modern, 1880–1917

585

both freedom and risk, and working-class women were
particularly vulnerable. At the same time, middle-class
women — expected  to  engage  in  selfless  community
service — often  saw  the  impact  of  industrialization
more clearly than fathers, brothers, and husbands did.
In  seeking  to  address  alcoholism,  poverty,  and  other
social  and  economic  ills,  they  gained  a  new  sense  of
their  own  collective  power.  Women’s  protest  and
reform work thus helped lay the foundations for pro-
gressivism (Chapter 20) and modern women’s rights.

Changes in Family Life
The  average  American  family,  especially  among  the
middle  class,  decreased  in  size  during  the  industrial
era. In 1800, white women who survived to menopause
had borne an average of 7.0 children; by 1900, the aver-
age was 3.6. On farms and in many working-class fam-
ilies, youngsters counted as assets on the family balance
sheet: they worked in fields or factories. But parents who
had fewer sons and daughters could concentrate their
resources, educating and preparing each child for suc-
cess  in  the  new  economy.  Among  the  professional
classes,  education  became  a  necessity,  while  limiting
family  size  became,  more  broadly,  a  key  to  upward
mobility.

Several  factors  limited  childbearing.  Americans
married at older ages, and many mothers tried to space
pregnancies more widely — as their mothers and grand-
mothers had — by nursing children for several years,
which  suppressed  fertility.  By  the  late  nineteenth  cen-
tury, as vulcanized rubber became available, couples also
had  access  to  a  range  of  other  contraceptive  methods,
such  as  condoms  and  diaphragms.  With  pressure  for
family limitation rising, these methods were widely used
and apparently effective. But couples rarely wrote about
them.  Historians’  evidence  comes  from  the  occasional
frank diary and from the thriving success of the mail-
order  contraceptive  industry,  which  advertised  promi-
nently  and  shipped  products — wrapped  in  discreet
brown paper packages — to customers nationwide.

Reluctance to talk about contraceptives was under-
standable,  since  information  about  them  was  stig-
matized  and,  after  1873,  illegal  to  distribute.  During
Reconstruction, Anthony Comstock, crusading secre-
tary  of  the  New  York  Society  for  the  Suppression  of
Vice,  secured  a  federal  law  banning  “obscene  mate-
rials” from the U.S. mail. The Comstock Act (1873) pro-
hibited circulation of almost any information about sex
and birth control. Comstock won support for the law,
in part, by appealing to parents’ fears that young people
were  receiving  sexual  information  through  the  mail,

John Singer Sargent, Mr. and Mrs. I. N. Phelps
Stokes, 1897

This painting was a wedding gift to this wealthy young
couple, both of whom inherited substantial fortunes. In
what ways does the artist, a famous portraitist, represent
Edith Minturn Stokes as a “New Woman” of the 1890s?
What does he suggest about the relationship between
husband and wife? How might we reconcile this with the
painting’s title, which identiﬁes the central ﬁgure as “Mrs.
I. N. Phelps Stokes,” not as “Edith”? Mrs. Stokes was a
noted beauty and active in an array of charitable causes.
Here she wears a shirtwaist and skirt, more practical than
the traditional heavy dresses and bustles of the previous
decade. © The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Image source: Art
Resource, NY.

