586

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

Portrait of a Middle-Class
American Family

This photograph of the Hedlund family
was taken on July 4, 1911, on the front
porch of their home in St. Paul, Minne-
sota. Christian, Grace, and Anna Hedlund
appear on the top row, Louis and George
on the bottom. Families like this one —
with three children — were becoming
typical among the middle class, in contrast
to larger families in earlier generations.
This photo was taken by twenty-one-year-
old Joseph Pavlicek, a recent immigrant
from Eastern Europe who was boarding
with the Hedlunds. Pavlicek bought ﬁre-
works for the children to celebrate the
holiday. He remembered being so proud
and grateful to be in America that his
heart “was nearly bursting.” Minnesota
Historical Society.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
In what ways did the
Comstock Act reﬂect and
contradict the realities of
American life in the indus-
trial era?

promoting the rise of “secret vice.”
Though critics charged Comstock
with high-handed interference in
private matters, others supported
his work, fearful of the rising tide
of  pornography,  sexual  informa-
tion,  and  contraceptives  made
available  by  industrialization.  A
committee  of  the  New  York  legislature  declared
Comstock’s crusade “wholly essential to the safety and
decency of the community.” It appears, however, that
Comstock  had  little  success  in  stopping  the  lucrative
and popular trade in contraceptives.

Education
In  the  industrial  economy,  the  watchword  for  young
people who hoped to secure good jobs was education.
A  high  school  diploma — now  a  gateway  to  a  college

degree — was  valuable  for  boys  who  hoped  to  enter
professional  or  managerial  work.  Daughters  attended
in even larger numbers than their brothers (Table 18.1).
Parents of the Civil War generation, who had witnessed
the  plight  of  war  widows  and  orphans,  encouraged
girls to prepare themselves for teaching or office jobs,
work  before  marriage,  and  gain  skills  they  could  fall
back on, “just in case.” By 1900, 71 percent of Americans
between the ages of five and eighteen attended school.
That figure rose further in the early twentieth century,
as  public  officials  adopted  laws  requiring  school
attendance.

Most high schools were coeducational, and almost
every high school featured athletics. Recruited first as
cheerleaders  for  boys’  teams,  girls  soon  established
field hockey and other sports of their own. Boys and
girls  engaged  in  friendly — and  sometimes  not-so-
friendly — rivalry in high school. In 1884, a high school
newspaper  in  Concord,  New  Hampshire,  published

