CHAPTER 18

  The Victorians Make the Modern, 1880–1917

587

TABLE 18.1

High School Graduates, 1870–1910

Year

1870

1890

1910

Number

  16,000

  44,000

156,000

Percent
17-Year-Olds

2.0

3.0

8.6

Male

  7,000

19,000

64,000

Female

  9,000

25,000

93,000

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States, 2 vols. (Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975), 1: 386.

this poem from a disgruntled boy who caricatured his
female classmates:

We know many tongues of living and dead,
In science and fiction we’re very well read,
But we cannot cook meat and cannot make bread
And we’ve wished many times that we were all dead.

A  female  student  shot  back  a  poem  of  her  own,
denouncing male students’ smoking habit:

But if boys will smoke cigarettes
Although the smoke may choke them,
One consolation still remains —
They kill the boys that smoke them.

The rate of Americans attending college had long
hovered around 2 percent; driven by public universi-
ties’  expansion,  the  rate  rose  in  the  1880s,  reaching
8  percent  by  1920.  Much  larger  numbers  attended  a
growing  network  of  business  and  technical  schools.
“GET  A  PLACE  IN  THE  WORLD,”  advertised  one
Minneapolis business college in 1907, “where your tal-
ents can be used to the best advantage.” Typically, such
schools offered both day and night classes in subjects
such as bookkeeping, typewriting, and shorthand.

The  needs  of  the  new  economy  also  shaped  the
curriculum at more traditional collegiate institutions.
State  universities  emphasized  technical  training  and
fed the growing professional workforce with graduates
trained in fields such as engineering. Many private col-
leges  distanced  themselves  from  such  practical  pur-
suits;  their  administrators  argued  that  students  who
aimed  to  be  leaders  needed  broad-based  knowledge.
But  they  modernized  course  offerings,  emphasizing
French and German, for example, rather than Latin and
Greek. Harvard, led by dynamic president Charles W.
Eliot  from  1869  to  1909,  pioneered  the  liberal  arts.
Students at the all-male college chose from a range of
electives, as Eliot called for classes that developed each
young man’s “individual reality and creative power.”

In the South, one of the most famous educational
projects was Booker T. Washington’s Tuskegee Institute,
founded in 1881. Washington both taught and exem-
plified the goal of self-help; his autobiography, Up from
Slavery  (1901),  became  a  best-seller.  Because  of  the
deep poverty in which most southern African Amer-
icans lived, Washington concluded that “book educa-
tion” for most “would be almost a waste of time.” He
focused  instead  on  industrial  education.  Students,  he
argued, would “be sure of knowing how to make a liv-
ing after they had left us.” Tuskegee sent female gradu-
ates into teaching and nursing; men more often entered
the industrial trades or farmed by the latest scientific
methods.

Washington gained national fame in 1895 with his
Atlanta  Compromise address, delivered at the Cotton
States Exposition in Atlanta, Georgia. For the exposi-
tion’s  white  organizers,  the  racial  “compromise”  was
inviting  Washington  to  speak  at  all.  It  was  a  move
intended  to  show  racial  progress  in  the  South.
Washington,  in  turn,  delivered  an  address  that  many
interpreted  as  approving  racial  segregation.  Stating
that African Americans had, in slavery days, “proved
our  loyalty  to  you,”  he  assured  whites  that  “in  our
humble  way,  we  shall  stand  by  you . . . ready  to  lay
down  our  lives,  if  need  be,  in  defense  of  yours.”  The
races could remain socially detached: “In all things that
are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers,
yet  one  as  the  hand  in  all  things  essential  to  mutual
progress.”  Washington  urged,
however,  that  whites  join  him  in
working  for  “the  highest  intelli-
gence and development of all.”

Whites  greeted  this  address
with enthusiasm, and Washington
became the most prominent black
leader of his generation. His sooth-
ing rhetoric and style of leadership, based on avoiding
confrontation  and  cultivating  white  patronage  and

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did educational
opportunities change
after the Civil War, and
for whom?

