588

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

institutions,  including  teacher-training  colleges.  For
affluent families, private colleges offered an education
equivalent to men’s — for an equally high price. Vassar
College  started  the  trend  when  it  opened  in  1861;
Smith,  Wellesley,  and  others  followed.  Anxious  doc-
tors  warned  that  these  institutions  were  dangerous:
intensive brain work would unsex young women and
drain energy from their ovaries, leading them to bear
weak  children.  But  as  thousands  of  women  earned
degrees  and  suffered  no  apparent  harm,  fears  faded.
Single-sex  higher  education  for  women  spread  from
private to public institutions, especially in the South,
where the Mississippi State College for Women (1885)
led the way.

Coeducation  was  more  prevalent  in  the  Midwest
and West, where many state universities opened their
doors to female students after the Civil War. Women
were also admitted to most African American colleges
founded during Reconstruction. By 1910, 58 percent of
America’s colleges and universities were coeducational.
While students at single-sex institutions forged strong
bonds  with  one  another,  women  also  gained  benefits
from  learning  with  men.  When  male  students  were
friendly, they built comfortable working relationships;
when men were hostile, women learned coping skills
that served them well in later employment or reform
work.  One  doctor  who  studied  at  the  University  of
Iowa remembered later that he and his friends merci-
lessly harassed the first women who entered the medi-
cal  school.  But  when  the  women  showed  they  were
good students, the men’s attitudes changed to “whole-
some respect.”

Whether or not they got a college education, more
and more women recognized, in the words of Elizabeth
Cady Stanton, their “solitude of self.” In the changing
economy, they could not always count on fathers and
husbands. Women who needed to support themselves
could  choose  from  dozens  of  guidebooks  such  as
What Girls Can Do (1880) and How to Make Money
Although  a  Woman  (1895).  The  Association  for  the
Advancement of Women, founded in 1873 by women’s
college graduates, defended women’s higher education
and argued that women’s paid employment was a pos-
itive good.

Today, many economists argue that education and
high-quality jobs for women are keys to reducing pov-
erty in the developing world. In the United States, that
process also led to broader gains in women’s political
rights.  As  women  began  to  earn  advanced  degrees,
work for wages and salaries, and live independently, it
became harder to argue that women were “dependents”
who did not need to vote.

Booker T. Washington

In an age of severe racial oppression, Booker T. Washington
emerged as the leading public voice of African Americans.
He was remarkable both for his effectiveness in speaking to
white Americans and for his deep understanding of the aspi-
rations of blacks. Born a slave, Washington had plenty of
ﬁrsthand experience with racism. But having befriended
several whites in his youth, he also believed that African
Americans could appeal to whites of good will — and
maneuver around those who were hostile — in the
struggle for equality. He hoped, most of all, that
economic achievement would erase white prejudice.
Brown Brothers.

private influence, was well suited to the difficult years
after Reconstruction. Washington believed that money
was  color-blind,  that  whites  would  respect  economic
success. He represented the ideals of millions of African
Americans who hoped education and hard work would
erase  white  prejudice.  That  hope  proved  tragically
overoptimistic. As the tide of disenfranchisement and
segregation rolled in, Washington would come under
fire  from  a  younger  generation  of  race  leaders  who
argued  that  he  accommodated  too  much  to  white
racism.

In addition to African American education, women’s
higher education expanded  notably. In the Northeast
and  South,  women  most  often  attended  single-sex

