CHAPTER 18

  The Victorians Make the Modern, 1880–1917

589

Class of 1896, Radcliffe College

When Harvard University, long a bastion of male privilege, created an “Annex” for women’s instruction in
1879, it was a sure sign of growing support for women’s higher education. The Annex became Radcliffe
College in 1894. Two years later, this graduating class of thirty posed for their portrait. Among them was
Alice Sterling of Bridgeport, Connecticut, who went on to marry Harvard graduate Frank Cook and devote
herself to Protestant foreign missions. On two trips around the world, Alice Sterling Cook visited all the
women’s colleges that missionaries had founded in India, China, and Japan. Cook’s energetic public activities
typiﬁed those of many women’s college alumnae. Schlesinger Library, Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, Harvard
University.

From Domesticity to Women’s Rights
As  the  United  States  confronted  industrialization,
middle-class  women  steadily  expanded  their  place
beyond  the  household,  building  reform  movements
and taking political action. Starting in the 1880s, wom-
en’s clubs sprang up and began to study such problems
as  pollution,  unsafe  working  conditions,  and  urban
poverty.  So  many  formed  by  1890  that  their  leaders
created  a  nationwide  umbrella  organization,  the
General  Fed eration  of  Women’s  Clubs.  Women  justi-
fied  such  work  through  the  ideal  of  maternalism,
appealing to their special role as mothers. Maternalism
was  an  intermediate  step  between  domesticity  and

modern  arguments  for  women’s  equality.  “Women’s
place  is  Home,”  declared  the  journalist  Rheta  Childe
Dorr. But she added, “Home is the community. The city
full of people is the Family. . . . Badly do the Home and
Family need their mother.”

The Woman’s  Christian Temperance  Union  One
maternalist goal was to curb alcohol abuse by prohibit-
ing  liquor  sales.  The  Woman’s  Christian  Temperance
Union (WCTU), founded in 1874, spread rapidly after
1879,  when  charismatic  Frances  Willard  became  its
leader.  More  than  any  other  group  of  the  late  nine-
teenth  century,  the  WCTU  launched  women  into
reform. Willard knew how to frame political demands

