590

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
How did women use wide-
spread beliefs about their
“special role” to justify
political activism, and for
what goals?

in  the  language  of  feminine  self-
sacrifice. “Womanliness first,” she
advised her followers; “afterward,
what  you  will.”  WCTU  members
vividly  described  the  plight  of
abused  wives  and  children  when
men suffered in the grip of alco-
holism.  Willard’s  motto  was
“Home Protection,” and though it placed all the blame
on  alcohol  rather  than  other  factors,  the  WCTU
became  the  first  organization  to  identify  and  combat
domestic violence.

The  prohibitionist  movement  drew  activists  from
many backgrounds. Middle-class city dwellers worried
about  the  link  between  alcoholism  and  crime,  espe-
cially in the growing immigrant wards. Rural citizens
equated  liquor  with  big-city  sins  such  as  prostitution
and political corruption. Methodists, Baptists, Mormons,
and  members  of  other  denominations  condemned

drinking  for  religious  reasons.  Immigrants  passion-
ately disagreed, however: Germans and Irish Catholics
enjoyed  their  Sunday  beer  and  saw  no  harm  in  it.
Saloons were a centerpiece of working-class leisure and
community  life,  offering  free  lunches,  public  toilets,
and a place to share neighborhood news. Thus, while
some  labor  unions  advocated  voluntary  temperance,
attitudes toward prohibition divided along ethnic, reli-
gious, and class lines.

WCTU  activism  led  some  leaders  to  raise  radical
questions about the shape of industrial society. As she
investigated  alcohol  abuse,  Willard  increasingly  con-
fronted  poverty,  hunger,  unemployment,  and  other
industrial  problems.  “Do  Everything,”  she  urged  her
members.  Across  the  United  States,  WCTU  chapters
founded soup kitchens and free libraries. They intro-
duced  a  German  educational  innovation,  the  kinder-
garten.  They  investigated  prison  conditions.  Though
she did not persuade most prohibitionists to follow her

A Plea for Temperance, 1874

The origins of the Woman’s Christian
Temperance Union lay in spontaneous
prayer meetings held by women outside
local saloons, where they appealed for
men to stop drinking and liquor sellers
to destroy their product. A string of such
meetings in Ohio won national attention,
as in this image from a popular magazine,
the Daily Graphic. “Who Will Win?” asked
the artist. The answers varied. A few saloon
owners, struck with remorse over the dam-
age caused by alcohol abuse, smashed their
beer kegs and poured their liquor into the
gutters. Far more refused, but in the 1880s,
temperance women succeeded in organiz-
ing the largest grassroots movement of their
day to build support for outlawing liquor
sales. The Granger Collection, New York.

