CHAPTER 18

  The Victorians Make the Modern, 1880–1917

591

lead, Willard declared herself a Christian Socialist and
urged more attention to workers’ plight. She advocated
laws establishing an eight-hour workday and abolish-
ing child labor.

Willard also called for women’s voting rights, lend-
ing  powerful  support  to  the  independent  suffrage
movement  that  had  emerged  during  Reconstruction.
Controversially, the WCTU threw its energies behind
the  Prohibition  Party,  which  exercised  considerable
clout during the 1880s. Women worked in the party as
speakers, convention delegates, and even local candi-
dates. Liquor was big business, and powerful interests
mobilized  to  block  antiliquor  legislation.  In  many
areas — particularly the cities — prohibition simply did
not gain majority support. Willard retired to England,
where she died in 1898, worn and discouraged by many
defeats.  But  her  legacy  was  powerful.  Other  groups
took up the cause, eventually winning national prohi-
bition after World War I.

Through its emphasis on human welfare, the WCTU
encouraged  women  to  join  the  national  debate  over
poverty and inequality of wealth. Some became active
in  the  People’s  Party  of  the  1890s,  which  welcomed
women as organizers and stump speakers. Others led
groups  such  as  the  National  Congress  of  Mothers,
founded in 1897, which promoted better child-rearing
techniques  in  rural  and  working-class  families.  The
WCTU had taught women how to lobby, raise money,
and even run for office. Willard wrote that “perhaps the
most significant outcome” of the movement was wom-
en’s “knowledge of their own power.”

Women,  Race,  and  Patriotism  As  in  temperance
work,  women  played  central  roles  in  patriotic  move-
ments  and  African  American  community  activism.
Members of the Daughters of the American Revolution
(DAR),  founded  in  1890,  celebrated  the  memory  of
Revolutionary War heroes. Equally influential was the
United Daughters of the Confederacy (UDC), founded
in  1894 to extol the South’s “Lost Cause.” The UDC’s
elite southern members shaped Americans’ memory of
the Civil War by constructing monuments, distribut-
ing Confederate flags, and promoting school textbooks
that defended the Confederacy and condemned Recon-
struction.  The  UDC’s  work  helped  build  and  main-
tain  support  for  segregation  and  disenfranchisement
(Chapter 15, Thinking Like a Historian, p. 502).

African  American  women  did  not  sit  idle  in  the
face of this challenge. In 1896, they created the National
Association  of  Colored  Women.  Through  its  local
clubs, black women arranged for the care of orphans,
founded homes for the elderly, advocated temperance,

Ida B. Wells

In 1887, Ida Wells (Wells-Barnett after she married in 1895)
was thrown bodily from a train in Tennessee for refusing to
vacate her seat in a section reserved for whites, launching her
into a lifelong crusade for racial justice. Her mission was to
expose the evil of lynching in the South. This image is the title
page of a pamphlet she published in 1892. Manuscripts,
Archives and Rare Books Division, Schomburg Center for Research in
Black Culture, New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden
Foundations.

and undertook public health campaigns. Such women
shared  with  white  women  a  determination  to  carry
domesticity into the public sphere. Journalist Victoria
Earle  Matthews  hailed  the  American  home  as  “the
foundation upon which nationality rests, the pride of
the  citizen,  and  the  glory  of  the  Republic.”  She  and
other African American women used the language of
domesticity and respectability to justify their work.

One  of  the  most  radical  voices  was  Ida  B.  Wells,
who  as  a  young  Tennessee  schoolteacher  sued  the
Chesapeake & Ohio Railroad for denying her a seat in
the  ladies’  car.  In  1892,  a  white  mob  in  Memphis
invaded  a  grocery  store  owned  by  three  of  Wells’s

