592

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

friends,  angry  that  it  competed  with  a  nearby  white-
owned  store.  When  the  black  store  owners  defended
themselves,  wounding  several  of  their  attackers,  all
three  were  lynched.  Grieving  their  deaths,  Wells  left
Memphis and urged other African Americans to join
her in boycotting the city’s white businesses. As a jour-
nalist,  she  launched  a  one-woman  campaign  against
lynching.  Wells’s  investigations  demolished  the  myth
that lynchers were reacting to the crime of interracial
rape;  she  showed  that  the  real  cause  was  more  often
economic competition, a labor dispute, or a consensual
relationship between a white woman and a black man.
Settling in Chicago, Wells became a noted and accom-
plished  reformer,  but  in  an  era  of  increasing  racial
injustice, few whites supported her cause.

The  largest  African  American  women’s  organiza-
tion arose within the National Baptist Church (NBC),
which by  1906  represented  2.4  million black  church-
goers.  Founded  in  1900,  the  Women’s  Convention  of
the NBC funded night schools, health clinics, kinder-
gartens, day care centers, and prison outreach programs.
Adella  Hunt  Logan,  born  in  Alabama,  exemplified
how such work could lead women to demand political
rights. Educated at Atlanta University, Logan became a
women’s club leader, teacher, and suffrage advocate. “If
white  American  women,  with  all  their  mutual  and
acquired  advantage,  need  the  ballot,”  she  declared,
“how  much  more  do  Black  Americans,  male  and
female, need the strong defense of a vote to help secure
them  their  right  to  life,  liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of
happiness?”

Women’s Rights  Though it had split into two rival
organizations  during  Reconstruction,  the  movement
for women’s suffrage reunited in 1890 in the National
American  Woman  Suffrage  Association  (NAWSA).
Soon afterward, suffragists built on earlier victories in
the West, winning full ballots for women in Colorado
(1893), Idaho (1896), and Utah (1896, reestablished as
Utah gained statehood). Afterward, movement leaders
were discouraged by a decade of state-level defeats and
Congress’s refusal to consider a constitutional amend-
ment.  But  suffrage  again  picked  up  momentum  after
1911 (Map 18.2). By 1913, most women living west of
the Mississippi River had the ballot. In other localities,
women could vote in municipal elections, school elec-
tions, or liquor referenda.

The  rising  prominence  of  the  women’s  suffrage
movement  had  an  ironic  result:  it  prompted  some
women — and men — to organize against it, in groups
such as the National Association Opposed to Woman

Suffrage  (1911).  Antisuffragists  argued  that  it  was
expensive to add so many voters to the rolls; wives’ bal-
lots would just “double their husbands’ votes” or worse,
cancel  them  out,  subjecting  men  to  “petticoat  rule.”
Some  antisuffragists  also  argued  that  voting  would
undermine  women’s  special  roles  as  disinterested
reformers:  no  longer  above  the  fray,  they  would  be
plunged into the “cesspool of politics.” In short, women
were  “better  citizens  without  the  ballot.”  Such  argu-
ments  helped  delay  passage  of  national  women’s  suf-
frage until after World War I.

By the 1910s, some women moved beyond suffrage
to take a public stance for what they called feminism —
women’s  full  political,  economic,  and  social  equality.
A  famous  site  of  sexual  rebellion  was  New  York’s
Greenwich Village, where radical intellectuals, includ-
ing many gays and lesbians, created a vibrant commu-
nity.  Among  other  political  activities,  women  there
founded  the  Heterodoxy  Club  (1912),  open  to  any
woman who pledged not to be “orthodox in her opin-
ions.”  The  club  brought  together  intellectuals,  jour-
nalists,  and  labor  organizers.  Almost  all  supported
suffrage, but they had a more ambitious view of what
was needed for women’s liberation. “I wanted to belong
to the human race, not to a ladies’ aid society,” wrote
one divorced journalist who joined Heterodoxy. Fem-
inists  argued  that  women  should  not  simply  fulfill
expectations  of  feminine  self-sacrifice;  they  should
work on their own behalf.

Science and Faith
Amid  rapid  change,  the  United  States  remained  a
deeply religious nation. But new discoveries enhanced
another  kind  of  belief:  faith  in  science.  In  the  early
nineteenth century, most Americans had believed the
world was about six thousand years old. No one knew
what lay beyond the solar system. By the 1910s, pale-
ontologists were classifying the dinosaurs, astronomers
had  identified  distant  galaxies,  and  physicists  could
measure the speed of light. Many scientists and ordi-
nary Americans accepted the theory of evolution.

Scientific discoveries received widespread publicity
through a series of great world’s fairs, most famously
Chicago’s  1893  World’s  Columbian  Exposition,  held
(a year late) to celebrate Columbus’s arrival in America
in  1492.  At  the  vast  fairgrounds,  visitors  strolled
through  enormous  buildings  that  displayed  the  latest
inventions in industry, machinery, and transportation.
They  marveled  over  a  moving  sidewalk  and,  at  dusk,

