CHAPTER 18

  The Victorians Make the Modern, 1880–1917

593

Dates on the map indicate when
individual states, on their own initiative,
granted full suffrage to women.

C A N A D A

Note how women won the right to
vote in a roughly west-to-east movement.
What reasons might be advanced to
explain this pattern of diffusion?

WASH.
1910

OREGON
1912

MONTANA
1914

IDAHO
1896

WYOMING
1890

MINN.

NORTH
DAKOTA

SOUTH
DAKOTA
1918

WIS.

MICH.
1918

NEBRASKA

IOWA

ILL.

IND.

OHIO

MD.

NEVADA
1914

CALIF.
1911

UTAH
1896

COLORADO
1893

ARIZONA
1912

NEW
MEXICO

KANSAS
1912

MO.

OKLAHOMA
1918

ARK.

KY.

TENNESSEE

NEW
YORK
1917

PA.

ME.

VT.

N.H.

MASS.

R.I.

CONN.

N.J.
DEL.

N

W

E

S

W.
VA.

VA.

NORTH
CAROLINA

S.C.

PACIFIC
OCEAN

Effective Date of Equal Suffrage

M E X I C O

ALA. GEORGIA

MISS.

LA.

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

TEXAS

FLA.

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

By 1909
1910–1918
Partial suffrage by 1919
No women’s suffrage by 1919

This map uses colors to divide the states into four categories. Purple
indicates where women had the right to vote before 1910. In blue states
women had equal voting rights prior to 1919. Red shows where women
enjoyed the right to vote in some elections, but not others. Green indicates
the states where women could not vote at all in 1919.

(after Opdycke)

MAP 18.2
Women’s Suffrage, 1890–1919

By 1909, after more than sixty years of agitation, only four lightly populated western states had
granted women full voting rights. A number of other states offered partial suffrage, limited to
voting for school boards and such issues as taxes and local referenda on whether or not to permit
the sale of liquor licenses (the so-called local option). Between 1910 and 1918, as the effort shifted
to the struggle for a constitutional amendment, eleven states joined the list granting full suffrage.
The West remained the most progressive region in granting women’s voting rights; the most
stubborn resistance lay in the ex-Confederacy.

saw the fair buildings illuminated with strings of elec-
tric lights. One observer called the fair “a vast and won-
derful university of the arts and sciences.”

It  is  hardly  surprising,  amid  these  achievements,
that “fact worship” became a central feature of intellec-
tual  life.  Researchers  in  many  fields  argued  that  one
could rely only on hard facts to understand the “laws of
life.” In their enthusiasm, some economists and sociol-
ogists rejected all social reform as sentimental. Fiction
writers and artists kept a more humane emphasis, but
they made use of similar methods — close observation
and attention to real-life experience — to create works

of realism. Other Americans struggled to reconcile sci-
entific discoveries with their religious faith.

Darwinism and Its Critics
Evolution — the idea that species are not fixed, but ever
changing — was not a simple idea on which all scien-
tists  agreed.  In  his  immensely  influential  1859  book,
On  the  Origin  of  Species,  British  naturalist  Charles
Darwin  argued  that  all  creatures  struggle  to  survive.
When individual members of a species are born with
random  genetic  mutations  that  better  suit  them  for

