594

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

their environment — for example, camouflage coloring
for a moth — these characteristics, since they are genet-
ically transmissible, become dominant in future gener-
ations. Many scientists rejected this theory of natural
selection. They followed a line of thinking laid out by
French  biologist  Jean  Baptiste  Lamarck,  who  argued,
unlike Darwin, that individual animals or plants could
acquire  transmittable  traits  within  a  single  lifetime.
A  rhinoceros  that  fought  fiercely,  in  Lamarck’s  view,
could  build  up  a  stronger  horn;  its  offspring  would
then be born with that trait.

Darwin himself disapproved of the word evolution
(which does not appear in his book) because it implied
upward  progress.  In  his  view,  natural  selection  was
blind:  environments  and  species  changed  randomly.
Others  were  less  scrupulous  about  drawing  sweeping
conclusions from Darwin’s work. In the 1870s, British
philosopher  Herbert  Spencer  spun  out  an  elaborate
theory  of  how  human  society
advanced  through  “survival  of
the  fittest.”  Social  Darwinism,  as
Spencer’s  idea  became  (confus-
ingly) known, found its American
champion  in  William  Graham
Sumner,  a  sociology  professor  at
Yale.  Competition,  said  Sumner,
was a law of nature, like gravity. Who were the fittest?
“Millionaires,” Sumner declared. Their success showed
they were “naturally selected.”

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
How did the ideas of sci-
entists and social scientists
reﬂect events they saw
happening around them?

Even in the heyday of Social Darwinism, Sumner’s
views  were  controversial  (American  Voices,  p.  596).
Some thinkers objected to the application of biological
findings to the realm of society and government. They
pointed  out  that  Darwin’s  theories  applied  to  finches
and tortoises, not human institutions. Social Darwin-
ism, they argued, was simply an excuse for the worst
excesses  of  industrialization.  By  the  early  twentieth
century, intellectuals revolted against Sumner and his
allies.

Meanwhile, though, the most dubious applications
of evolutionary ideas were codified into new reproduc-
tive  laws  based  on  eugenics,  a  so-called  science  of
human  breeding.  Eugenicists  argued  that  mentally
deficient people should be prevented from reproduc-
ing.  They  proposed  sterilizing  those  deemed  “unfit,”
especially residents of state asylums for the insane or
mentally disabled. In early-twentieth-century America,
almost half of the states enacted eugenics laws. By the
time  eugenics  subsided  in  the  1930s,  about  twenty
thousand  people  had  been  sterilized,  with  California
and  Virginia  taking  the  lead.  Women  in  Puerto  Rico
and other U.S. imperial possessions (Chapter 21) also

suffered  from  eugenics  policies.  Advocates  of  eugen-
ics had a broad impact. Because they associated mental
unfitness  with  “lower  races” — including  people  of
African,  Asian,  and  Native  Ameri can  descent — their
arguments lent support to segregation and racial dis-
crimination. By warning that immigrants from Eastern
and  Southern  Europe  would  dilute  white  Americans’
racial purity, eugenicists helped win passage of immi-
gration restriction in the 1920s.

Realism in the Arts
Inspired  by  the  quest  for  facts,  American  authors
rejected  nineteenth-century  romanticism  and  what
they  saw  as  its  unfortunate  product,  sentimentality.
Instead, they took up literary realism. In the 1880s, edi-
tor and novelist William Dean Howells called for writ-
ers  “to  picture  the  daily  life  in  the  most  exact  terms
possible.” By the 1890s, a younger generation of writers
pursued this goal. Theodore Dreiser dismissed unreal-
istic novels that always had “a happy ending.” In Main-
Travelled  Roads  (1891),  based  on  the  struggles  of  his
midwestern  farm  family,  Hamlin  Garland  turned  the
same  unsparing  eye  on  the  hardships  of  rural  life.
Stephen  Crane’s  Maggie:  A  Girl  of  the  Streets  (1893),
privately printed because no publisher would touch it,
described the seduction, abandonment, and death of a
slum girl.

Some  authors  believed  realism  did  not  go  far
enough  to  overturn  sentimentalism.  Jack  London
spent his teenage years as a factory worker, sailor, and
tramp. In stories such as “The Law of Life” (1901), he
dramatized  what  he  saw  as  the  harsh  reality  of  an
uncaring  universe.  American  society,  he  said,  was  “a
jungle wherein wild beasts eat and are eaten.” Similarly,
Stephen  Crane  tried  to  capture  “a  world  full  of  fists.”
London  and  Crane  helped  create  literary  naturalism.
They suggested that human beings were not so much
rational shapers of their own destinies as blind victims
of  forces  beyond  their  control — including  their  own
subconscious impulses.

America’s most famous writer, Samuel Langhorne
Clemens, who took the pen name of Mark Twain, came
to  an  equally  bleak  view.  Though  he  achieved  enor-
mous  success  with  such  lighthearted  books  as  The
Adventures  of  Tom  Sawyer  (1876),  Clemens  courted
controversy  with  The  Adventures  of  Huckleberry  Finn
(1884), notable  for  its  indictment  of  slavery  and  rac-
ism. In his novel A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s
Court (1889), which ends with a bloody, technology-
driven  slaughter  of  Arthur’s  knights,  Mark  Twain
became one of the bitterest critics of America’s idea of

