CHAPTER 18

  The Victorians Make the Modern, 1880–1917

595

John French Sloan, A Woman’s
Work, 1912

The subject of this painting — a woman
hanging out laundry behind a city
apartment building — is typical of the
subjects chosen by American artist John
Sloan (1871–1951). Sloan and a group
of his allies became famous as realists;
critics derided them as the “Ash Can
school” because they did not paint
rural landscapes or other conventional
subjects considered worthy of painting.
Sloan, though, warned against seeing
his paintings as simple representations
of reality, even if he described his work
as based on “a creative impulse derived
out of a consciousness of life.” “ ‘Looks
like’ is not the test of a good painting,”
he wrote: “Even the scientist is inter-
ested in effects only as phenomena
from which to deduce order in life.”
Cleveland Museum of Art. Gift of Amelia
Elizabeth White.

progress. Soon afterward, Clemens was devastated by
the  loss  of  his  wife  and  two  daughters,  as  well  as  by
failed  investments  and  bankruptcy.  An  outspoken
critic of imperialism and foreign missions, Twain even-
tually  denounced  Christianity  itself  as  a  hypocritical
delusion.  Like  his  friend  the  industrialist  Andrew
Carnegie, Clemens “got rid of theology.”

By the time Clemens died in 1910, realist and natu-
ralist writers had laid the groundwork for modernism,
which  rejected  traditional  canons  of  literary  taste.
Questioning  the  whole  idea  of  progress  and  order,
modernists focused on the subconscious and “primi-
tive” mind. Above all, they sought to overturn conven-
tion and tradition. Poet Ezra Pound exhorted, “Make
it new!” Modernism became the first great literary and
artistic movement of the twentieth century.

In the visual arts, new technologies influenced aes-
thetics. By 1900, some photographers argued that their
“true”  representations  made  painting  obsolete.  But
painters invented their own forms of realism. Nebraska-
born artist Robert Henri became fascinated with life in
the great cities. “The backs of tenement houses are liv-
ing documents,” he declared, and he set out to put them
on canvas. Henri and his followers, notably John Sloan
and George Bellows, called themselves the New York
Realists.  Critics  derided  them  as
the Ash Can school because they
chose subjects that were not con-
ventionally beautiful.

In  1913,  Realists  participated
in  one  of  the  most  controversial
events  in  American  art  history,

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What effect did technol-
ogy and scientiﬁc ideas
have on literature and the
arts?

