A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Three Interpretations

of Social Darwinism

The idea that human society advanced through “survival of the ﬁttest” was a
popular doctrine, referred to by historians as “Social Darwinism.” Many Ameri-
cans agreed with Harvard sociologist William Graham Sumner, who argued that
the  poor  and  weak  were  a  “burden,”  a  “dead-weight  on  the  society  in  all  its
struggles.” Such views prompted a range of responses, ranging from enthusias-
tic endorsement to uneasy accommodation to impassioned opposition.

Theodore Dreiser
The Financier

Theodore  Dreiser  (1871–1945)  was  an  American  literary
naturalist. His novel The Financier (1912) traces the rise of
Frank Cowperwood, a young man who, during the last years
of  the  nineteenth  century,  becomes  a  powerful  banker.
Dreiser loosely based the character on the life of ﬁnancier
Charles  Yerkes.  In  this  excerpt,  the  narrator  describes  a
transformative moment in Cowperwood’s youth.

[Cowperwood] could not figure out how this thing he
had come into — this life — was organized. How did all
these people get into the world? What were they doing
here? Who started things, anyhow? His mother told him
the story of Adam and Eve, but he didn’t believe it. . . .

One day he saw a squid and a lobster put in [a] tank,

and in connection with them was witness to a tragedy
which stayed with him all his life and cleared things up
considerably intellectually. The lobster, it appeared from
the talk of the idle bystanders, was offered no food, as the
squid was considered his rightful prey. He lay at the bottom
of the clear glass tank . . . apparently seeing nothing — you
could not tell in which way his beady, black buttons of
eyes were looking — but apparently they were never off
the body of the squid. The latter, pale and waxy in texture,
looking very much like pork fat or jade, moved about in
torpedo fashion; but his movements were apparently
never out of the eyes of his enemy, for by degrees small
portions of his body began to disappear, snapped off by
the relentless claws of his pursuer. . . .

[One day] only a portion of the squid remained. . . .
In the corner of the tank sat the lobster, poised apparently
for action. The boy stayed as long as he could, the bitter
struggle fascinating him. Now, maybe, or in an hour or
a day, the squid might die, slain by the lobster, and the
lobster would eat him. He looked again at the greenish-
copperish engine of destruction in the corner and
wondered when this would be. . . .

He returned that night, and lo! the expected had
happened. There was a little crowd around the tank.

The lobster was in the corner. Before him was the squid
cut in two and partially devoured. . . .

The incident made a great impression on him. It
answered in a rough way that riddle which had been
annoying him so much in the past: “How is life orga-
nized?” Things lived on each other — that was it. Lobsters
lived on squids and other things. What lived on lobsters?
Men, of course! . . . And what lived on men? he asked
himself. Was it other men? Wild animals lived on men.
And there were Indians and cannibals. And some men
were killed by storms and accidents. He wasn’t so sure
about men living on men; but men did kill each other.
How about wars and street fights and mobs? . . .

Frank thought of this and of the life he was tossed
into, for he was already pondering on what he should be
in this world, and how he should get along. From seeing
his father count money, he was sure that he would like
banking; and Third Street, where his father’s office was,
seemed to him the cleanest, most fascinating street in
the world.

Source: Theodore Dreiser, The Financier (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1912), 10–15.

Lyman Abbott
The Evolution of Christianity

Liberal Congregationalist Lyman Abbott (1835–1922) was
a noted advocate of the Social Gospel. In The Evolution of
Christianity (1892), Abbott sought to reconcile the theory
of evolution with the development of Christianity.

The doctrine of evolution is not a doctrine of harmonious
and uninterrupted progress. The most common, if not the
most accurate formula of evolution is “struggle for exis-
tence, survival of the fittest.” The doctrine of evolution
assumes that there are forces in the world seemingly hos-
tile to progress, that life is a perpetual battle and progress
a perpetual victory.

The Christian evolutionist will then expect to find

Christianity a warfare — in church, in society, in the
individual. . . . He will remember that the divine life is

596

