resident in undivine humanity. He will not be surprised to
find the waters of the stream disturbed; for he will reflect
that the divine purity has come into a turbid stream, and
that it can purify only by being itself indistinguishably
combined with the impure. When he is told that modern
Christianity is only a “civilized paganism,” he will reply,
“That is exactly what I supposed it to be; and it will con-
tinue to be a civilized paganism until civilization has
entirely eliminated paganism.” He will not be surprised to
find pagan ceremonies in the ritual, ignorance and super-
stition in the church, and even errors and partialisms in
the Bible. For he will remember that the divine life, which
is bringing all life into harmony with itself, is a life resi-
dent in man. He will remember that the Bible does not
claim to be the absolute Word of God; that, on the con-
trary . . . it claims to be the Word of God . . . as spoken to
men, and understood and interpreted by men, which saw
it in part as we still see it, and reflected it as from a mirror
in enigmas.

He will remember that the Church is not yet the bride
of Christ, but the plebeian daughter whom Christ is edu-
cating to be his bride. He will remember that Christianity
is not the absolutely divine, but the divine in humanity,
the divine force resident in man and transforming man
into the likeness of the divine. Christianity is the light
struggling with the darkness, life battling with death, the
spiritual overcoming the animal. We judge Christianity as
the scientist judges the embryo, as the gardener the bud,
as the teacher the pupil, — not by what it is, but by what it
promises to be.

Source: Lyman Abbott, The Evolution of Christianity (Boston: Houghton, Mifflin, 1892),
8–10.

Lester Frank Ward
Glimpses of the Cosmos

Lester Frank Ward (1841–1913) helped establish sociology
in  the  United  States.  Following  French  philosopher
Auguste  Comte,  he  held  that  the  social  sciences  should
develop methods of improving society. In his autobiogra-
phy  Glimpses  of  the  Cosmos  (1913–1918),  Ward  rejected
Social Darwinism.

How shall we distinguish this human, or anthropic,
method from the method of nature? Simply by reversing

all the definitions. Art is the antithesis of nature. If we call
one the natural method, we must call the other the artifi-
cial method. If nature’s process is rightly named natural
selection, man’s process is artificial selection. The survival
of the fittest is simply the survival of the strong, which
implies, and might as well be called, the destruction of the
weak. And if nature progresses through the destruction of
the weak, man progresses through the protection of the
weak. . . .

. . . Man, through his intelligence, has labored success-
fully to resist the law of nature. His success is conclusively
demonstrated by a comparison of his condition with that
of other species of animals. No other cause can be
assigned for his superiority. How can the naturalistic phi-
losophers shut their eyes to such obvious facts? Yet, what
is their attitude? They condemn all attempts to protect the
weak, whether by private or public methods. They claim
that it deteriorates the race by enabling the unfit to sur-
vive and transmit their inferiority. . . . Nothing is easier
than to show that the unrestricted competition of nature
does not secure the survival of the fittest possible, but
only of the actually fittest, and in every attempt man
makes to obtain something fitter than this actual fittest
he succeeds, as witness improved breeds of animals and
grafts of fruits. Now, the human method of protecting the
weak deals in such way with men. It not only increases
the number but improves the quality.

Source: Lester Frank Ward, Glimpses of the Cosmos (New York: Harper, 1913), 371, 374.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  By telling the squid and lobster story, what message was
Dreiser conveying to readers, about men such as Cow-
perwood? If Abbott and Ward had read The Financier,
how might they have responded? Why?

2.  Historians sometimes claim that American thinkers of
this era, endorsing Social Darwinism and “survival of
the ﬁttest,” opposed social reform. How do Abbott and
Ward complicate that view?

597

