598

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

the  Armory  Show.  Housed  in  an  enormous  National
Guard  building  in  New  York,  the  exhibit  introduced
America  to  modern  art.  Some  painters  whose  work
appeared at the show were experimenting with cubism,
characterized by abstract, geometric forms. Along with
works  by  Henri,  Sloan,  and  Bellows,  organizers  fea-
tured  paintings  by  European  rebels  such  as  Pablo
Picasso.  America’s  academic  art  world  was  shocked.
One critic called cubism “the total destruction of the
art of painting.” But as the exhibition went on to Boston
and  Chicago,  more  than  250,000  people  crowded  to
see it.

A striking feature of both realism and modernism,
as they developed, was that many leading writers and
artists  were  men.  In  making  their  work  strong  and
modern,  they  also  strove  to  assert  their  masculinity.
Paralleling Theodore Roosevelt’s call for “manly sports,”
they  denounced  nineteenth-century  culture  as  hope-
lessly  feminized.  Stephen  Crane  called  for  “virility”
in  literature.  Jack  London  described  himself  as  a
“man’s man, . . . lustfully roving and conquering.” Artist

Robert Henri banned small brushes as “too feminine.”
In their own ways, these writers and artists contributed
to a broad movement to masculinize American culture.

Religion: Diversity and Innovation
By the turn of the twentieth century, emerging scien-
tific  and  cultural  paradigms  posed  a  significant  chal-
lenge  to  religious  faith.  Some  Americans  argued  that
science  and  modernity  would  sweep  away  religion
altogether. Contrary to such predictions, American reli-
gious practice remained vibrant. Protestants developed
creative new responses to the challenges of industrial-
ization, while millions of newcomers built institutions
for worship and religious education.

Immigrant  Faiths  Arriving  in  the  United  States  in
large numbers, Catholics and Jews wrestled with similar
questions.  To  what  degree  should  they  adapt  to
Protestant-dominated  American  society?  Should  the
education of clergy be changed? Should children attend

Arthur B. Davies, Dancers, 1914–1915

Artist Arthur Davies (1862–1928) was one of the primary organizers of New York’s 1913 Armory Show,
which introduced Americans to modernist art. An associate of John Sloan and other New York Realists,
Davies experimented with an array of painting styles, as well as printmaking and tapestry making. This
painting dates from a three-year period, just after the Armory Show, in which Davies experimented with
Cubist techniques. Dancers, 1914–1915 (oil on canvas), Detroit Institute of Arts, USA/Gift of Ralph Harman Booth/The
Bridgeman Art Library.

