CHAPTER 18

  The Victorians Make the Modern, 1880–1917

599

religious or public schools? What happened if they mar-
ried outside the faith? Among Catholic leaders, Bishop
John  Ireland  of  Minnesota  argued  that  “the  principles
of  the  Church  are  in  harmony  with  the  interests  of
the  Repub lic.”  But  traditionalists,  led  by  Archbishop
Michael  A.  Corrigan  of  New  York,  disagreed.  They
sought to insulate Catholics from the pluralistic Ameri-
can environment. Indeed, by 1920, almost two million
children attended Catholic elementary schools nation-
wide,  and  Catholic  dioceses  operated  fifteen  hundred
high schools. Catholics as well as Jews feared some of the
same threats that distressed Protestants: industrial pov-
erty and overwork kept working-class people away from
worship services, while new consumer pleasures enticed
many of them to go elsewhere.

Faithful immigrant Catholics were anxious to pre-
serve familiar traditions from Europe, and they gener-
ally supported the Church’s traditional wing. But they
also wanted religious life to express their ethnic identi-
ties. Italians, Poles, and other new arrivals wanted sep-
arate parishes where they could celebrate their customs,
speak  their  languages,  and  establish  their  own  paro-
chial  schools.  When  they  became  numerous  enough,
they  also  demanded  their own  bishops. The  Catholic
hierarchy, dominated by Irishmen, felt the integrity of
the Church was at stake. The demand for ethnic par-
ishes  implied  local  control  of  church  property.  With
some  strain,  the  Catholic  Church  managed  to  satisfy
the diverse needs of the immigrant faithful. It met the
demand for representation, for example, by appointing
immigrant priests as auxiliary bishops within existing
dioceses.

In the same decades, many prosperous native-born
Jews embraced Reform Judaism, abandoning such reli-

gious practices as keeping a  kosher kitchen and con-
ducting  services  in  Hebrew.  This  was  not  the  way
of  Yiddish-speaking  Jews  from  Eastern  Europe,  who
arrived  in  large  numbers  after  the  1880s.  Generally
much poorer and eager to preserve their own traditions,
they  founded  Orthodox  synagogues,  often  in  vacant
stores, and practiced Judaism as they had at home.

But in Eastern Europe, Judaism had been an entire
way of life, one not easily replicated in a large American
city. “The very clothes I wore and the very food I ate
had a fatal effect on my religious habits,” confessed the
hero  of  Abraham  Cahan’s  novel  The  Rise  of  David
Levinsky (1917). “If you . . . attempt to bend your reli-
gion to the spirit of your surroundings, it breaks. It falls
to pieces.” Levinsky shaved off his beard and plunged
into  the  Manhattan  clothing  business.  Orthodox
Judaism  survived  the  transition  to  America,  but  like
other immigrant religions, it had to renounce its claims
to some of the faithful.

Protestant  Innovations  One  of  the  era’s  dramatic
religious developments — facilitated by global steamship
and telegraph lines — was the rise of Protestant foreign
missions.  From  a  modest  start  before  the  Civil  War,
this  movement  peaked  around  1915,  a  year  when
Amer ican religious organizations sponsored more than
nine thousand overseas missionaries, supported at home
by  armies  of  volunteers,  including  more  than  three
million women. A majority of Protestant missionaries
served in Asia, with smaller numbers posted to Africa
and the Middle East. Most saw American-style domes-
ticity as a central part of evangelism, and missionary
societies  sent  married  couples  into  the  field.  Many
unmarried women also served overseas as missionary

Christian Missions in
Japan, 1909

Through this colorful postcard,
Protestant missionaries in Japan
demonstrate their success in
winning converts (at least a
few) and their adaptation of
missionary strategies to meet
local needs and expectations.
Here, outside their headquarters,
they demonstrate “preaching by
means of banners.” The large
characters on the vertical banner
proclaim the “Association of
Christian Gospel Evangelists.”
The horizontal banner is a Jap-
anese translation of Matthew
11:28, “Come unto me, all ye
who labor and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest.”
© Bettmann/Corbis.

