600

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

IDENTIFY CAUSES
How did America’s reli-
gious life change in this
era, and what prompted
those changes?

teachers,  doctors,  and  nurses,
though  almost  never  as  minis-
ters. “American woman,” declared
one  Christian  reformer,  has  “the
exalted  privilege  of  extending
over the world those blessed influ-

ences, that are to renovate degraded man.”

Protestant  missionaries  won  converts,  in  part,  by
providing  such  modern  services  as  medical  care  and
women’s education. Some missionaries developed deep
bonds of respect with the people they served. Others
showed considerable condescension toward the “poor
heathen,”  who  in  turn  bristled  at  their  assumptions
(America Compared, p. 601). One Presbyterian, who
found  Syrians  uninterested  in  his  gospel  message,
angrily  denounced  all  Muslims  as  “corrupt  and
immoral.” By imposing their views of “heathen races”
and attacking those who refused to convert, Christian
missionaries  sometimes  ended  up  justifying  Western
imperialism.

Chauvinism  abroad  reflected  attitudes  that  also
surfaced  at  home.  Starting  in  Iowa  in  1887,  militant
Protestants  created  a  powerful  political  organization,
the American Protective Association (APA), which for
a brief period in the 1890s counted more than two mil-
lion members. This virulently nativist group expressed
outrage  at  the  existence  of  separate  Catholic  schools
while  demanding,  at  the  same  time,  that  all  public
school  teachers  be  Protestants.  The  APA  called  for  a
ban on Catholic officeholders, arguing that they were
beholden to an “ecclesiastic power” that was “not cre-
ated and controlled by American citizens.” In its viru-
lent  anti-Catholicism  and  calls  for  restrictions  on
immigrants, the APA prefigured the revived Ku Klux
Klan of the 1920s (Chapter 22).

The APA arose, in part, because Protestants found
their  dominance  challenged.  Millions  of  Americans,
especially  in  the  industrial  working  class,  were  now
Catholics  or  Jews.  Overall,  in  1916,  Protestants  still
constituted  about  60  percent  of  Americans  affiliated
with a religious body. But they faced formidable rivals:
the number of practicing Catholics in 1916 — 15.7 mil-
lion — was  greater  than  the  number  of  Baptists,
Methodists, and Presbyterians combined.

Some  Protestants  responded  to  the  urban,  immi-
grant challenge by evangelizing among the unchurched.
They  provided  reading  rooms,  day  nurseries,  voca-
tional classes, and other services. The goal of renewing
religious faith through dedication to justice and social
welfare became known as the  Social  Gospel. Its goals
were  epitomized  by  Charles  Sheldon’s  novel  In  His
Steps  (1896),  which  told  the  story  of  a  congregation

who resolved to live by Christ’s precepts for one year.
“If church members were all doing as Jesus would do,”
Sheldon  asked,  “could  it  remain  true  that  armies  of
men would walk the streets for jobs, and hundreds of
them curse the church, and thousands of them find in
the saloon their best friend?”

The  Salvation  Army,  which  arrived  from  Great
Britain  in  1879,  also  spread  a  gospel  message  among
the  urban  poor,  offering  assistance  that  ranged  from
soup kitchens to shelters for former prostitutes. When

The Salvation Army on the Streets

This theater poster for the popular play On the Bowery
(1894), written by theater agent Robert Neilson Stephens,
shows how many Americans perceived the Salvation Army.
Here, Salvation Army workers in New York City offer the
organization’s newspaper, War Cry, to a man who brushes
them off (rudely). The man is Steve Brodie, a celebrity who
was recruited to portray himself onstage. A former East River
lifesaving champion who became a saloon owner in New
York’s Bowery district, Brodie had won fame in 1886 by
claiming to have jumped from the Brooklyn Bridge and
survived. (It was later claimed that he faked the stunt, but
“doing a Brodie” became popular slang for taking a big
risk.) While many Americans admired the Salvation Army,
others — particularly men of working-class origins, like
Brodie — rejected its appeals. Library of Congress.

