A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Christianity in the

United States and

Japan

During  the  1893  Chicago  World’s  Columbian  Exhibition,  a  Parliament  of  Reli-
gions  brought  together  representatives  of  prominent  faiths  for  discussion.
English-speaking  Protestants  dominated  the  program,  but  several  Asian  rep-
resentatives  included  Kinzo  Hirai,  a  lay  Buddhist  from  Japan.  In  his  speech,
Hirai  reviewed  Japan’s  experiences  with  the  United  States  since  Commodore
Matthew C. Perry “opened” the country in 1853.

I do not understand why the Christian lands have ignored
the rights and advantages of forty million souls of Japan
for forty years. . . . One of the excuses offered by foreign
nations is that our country is not yet civilized. Is it the
principle of civilized law that the rights and profits of the
so-called uncivilized, or the weaker, should be sacrificed?
As I understand it, the spirit and necessity of law is to
protect the rights and profits of the weaker against the
aggression of the stronger. . . .

From the religious source, the claim is made that the
Japanese are idolaters and heathen. . . . [A]dmitting for
the sake of argument that we are idolaters and heathen,
is it Christian morality to trample upon the rights and
advantages of a non-Christian nation, coloring all their
natural happiness with the dark stain of injustice? . . .

You send your missionaries to Japan and they advise

us to be moral and believe Christianity. We like to be
moral, we know that Christianity is good; and we are
very thankful for this kindness. But at the same time our
people are rather perplexed. . . . For when we think that
the treaty stipulated in the time of feudalism, when we
were yet in our youth, is still clung to by the powerful
nations of Christendom; when we find that every year a
good many western vessels of seal fishery are smuggled
into our seas; when legal cases are always decided by the
foreign authorities in Japan unfavorably to us; when some
years ago a Japanese was not allowed to enter a university
on the Pacific coast of America because of his being of a
different race; when a few months ago the school board
in San Francisco enacted a regulation that no Japanese
should be allowed to enter the public school there; when

last year the Japanese were driven out in wholesale from
one of the territories of the United States; when our busi-
ness men in San Francisco were compelled by some union
not to employ Japanese assistants and laborers, but the
Americans; when there are some in the same city who
speak on the platform against those of us who are already
here; when there are many who go in procession hoisting
lanterns marked “Japs must go”; when the Japanese in the
Hawaiian Islands were deprived of their suffrage; when
we see some western people in Japan who erect before the
entrance to their houses a special post upon which is the
notice, “No Japanese is allowed to enter here” — just like a
board upon which is written, “No dogs allowed”; when we
are in such a situation, notwithstanding the kindness of
the western nations from one point of view, who send
their missionaries to us, that we unintelligent heathens
are embarrassed and hesitate to swallow the sweet and
warm liquid of the heaven of Christianity, will not be
unreasonable.

Source: The World’s Parliament of Religions, ed. John Henry Barrows (Chicago:
Parliament Publishing Co., 1893), 444–450.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  What is Hirai’s attitude toward American Christians?
2.  Of what events is Hirai aware that are taking place in the
United States? How does this shape his view of Christian
missions in Japan?

3.  How might American delegates to the Parliament, espe-
cially Protestant missionaries, have responded to Hirai?

all else failed, down-and-outers knew they could count
on  the  Salvation  Army,  whose  bell  ringers  became  a
familiar sight on city streets. The group borrowed up-
to-date marketing techniques and used the latest busi-
ness slang in urging its Christian soldiers to “hustle.”

The Salvation Army succeeded, in part, because it
managed to bridge an emerging divide between Social
Gospel  reformers  and  Protestants  who  were  taking  a

different theological path. Disturbed by what they saw
as rising secularism, conservative ministers and their
allies held a series of Bible Conferences at Niagara Falls
between 1876 and 1897. The resulting “Niagara Creed”
reaffirmed the literal truth of the Bible and the certain
damnation  of  those  not  born  again  in  Christ.  By  the
1910s, a network of churches and Bible institutes had
emerged  from  these  conferences.  They  called  their

601

