602

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

Billy Sunday with His Bible

One of the most popular
Protestant preachers of the early
twentieth century, Billy Sunday
(1862–1935) was a former pro-
fessional baseball player with an
imposing physique and dynamic
preaching style. More willing
than most of his predecessors to
make direct political arguments,
Sunday championed antiradical-
ism and prohibition — stances
that foreshadowed the
Protestant political crusades of
the 1920s. Sunday’s most
famous sermon was his anti-
liquor exhortation, “Get on
the Water Wagon.” Library of
Congress.

movement  fundamentalism,  based  on  their  belief  in
the fundamental truth of the Bible.

Fundamentalists and their allies made particularly
effective use of revival meetings. Unlike Social Gospel
advocates, revivalists said little about poverty or earthly
justice, focusing not on the matters of the world, but on
heavenly redemption. The pioneer modern evangelist
was  Dwight  L.  Moody,  a  former  Chicago  shoe  sales-
man and YMCA official who won fame in the 1870s.
Eternal life could be had for the asking, Moody prom-
ised. His listeners needed only “to come forward and
take,  take!”  Moody’s  successor,  Billy  Sunday,  helped
bring evangelism into the modern era. More often than
his  predecessors,  Sunday  took  political  stances  based
on his Protestant beliefs. Condemning the “booze traf-
fic”  was  his  greatest  cause.  Sunday  also  denounced
unrestricted  immigration  and  labor  radicalism.  “If  I
had  my  way  with  these  ornery  wild-eyed  Socialists,”
he once threatened, “I  would stand them up before a
firing  squad.”  Sunday  supported  some  progressive
reform  causes;  he  opposed  child  labor,  for  example,
and advocated voting rights for women. But in other
ways, his views anticipated the nativism and antiradi-
calism  that  would  dominate  American  politics  after
World War I.

Billy Sunday, like other noted men of his era, broke
free of Victorian practices and asserted his leadership
in a masculinized American culture. Not only was he
a  commanding  presence  on  the  stage,  but  before  his

conversion he had been a hard-drinking outfielder for
the Chicago White Stockings. To advertise his revivals,
Sunday often organized local men into baseball teams,
then put on his own uniform and played for both sides.
Through  such  feats  and  the  fiery  sermons  that  fol-
lowed, Sunday offered a model of spiritual inspiration,
manly strength, and political engagement. His revivals
were  thoroughly  modern:  marketed  shrewdly,  they
provided mass entertainment and the chance to meet a
pro baseball player. Like other cultural developments
of  the  industrializing  era,  Billy  Sunday’s  popularity
showed how Americans often adjusted to modernity:
they adapted older beliefs and values, enabling them to
endure in new forms.

SUMMARY
Industrialization and new consumer practices created
foundations  for  modern  American  culture.  While
middle-class families sought to preserve the Victorian
domestic ideal, a variety of factors transformed family
life.  Families  had  fewer  children,  and  a  substantial
majority  of  young  people  achieved  more  education
than their parents had obtained. Across class and gen-
der  lines,  Americans  enjoyed  athletics  and  the  out-
doors, fostering the rise of environmentalism.

Among  an  array  of  women’s  reform  movements,
the  Woman’s  Christian  Temperance  Union  sought

