CHAPTER 18

  CHAPTER REVIEW

603

prohibition of liquor, but it also addressed issues such
as domestic violence, poverty, and education. Members
of women’s clubs pursued a variety of social and eco-
nomic reforms, while other women organized for race
uplift and patriotic work. Gradually, the Victorian ideal
of female moral superiority gave way to modern claims
for women’s equal rights.

New  intellectual  currents,  including  Darwinism,
challenged Victorian certainties. In the arts, realist and
naturalist writers rejected both romanticism and Vic–
torian domesticity. Many Americans were shocked by

the  results,  including  Theodore  Dreiser’s  scandalous
novel Sister Carrie, Mark Twain’s rejection of Christian
faith, and the boldly modernist paintings displayed at
New York’s Armory Show. Science and modernism did
not, however, displace religion. Newly arrived Catholics
and Jews, as well as old-line Protestants, adapted their
faith  to  the  conditions  of  modern  life.  Foreign  mis-
sions,  in  the  meantime,  spread  the  Christian  gospel
around the world, with mixed results for those receiv-
ing the message.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

Key People

Thomas Edison (p. 576)
John Muir (p. 583)
Booker T. Washington (p. 587)
Frances Willard (p. 589)
Ida B. Wells (p. 591)
Mark Twain (Samuel Langhorne

Clemens) (p. 594)
Billy Sunday (p. 602)

Plessy v. Ferguson (p. 577)
Young Men’s Christian Associa-

National American Woman

Suffrage Association (p. 592)

tion (p. 580)

Negro Leagues (p. 581)
Sierra Club (p. 583)
National Park Service (p. 583)
National Audubon Society (p. 583)
Comstock Act (p. 585)
liberal arts (p. 587)
Atlanta Compromise (p. 587)
maternalism (p. 589)
Woman’s Christian Temperance

Union (p. 589)

National Association of Colored

Women (p. 591)

feminism (p. 592)
natural selection (p. 594)
Social Darwinism (p. 594)
eugenics (p. 594)
realism (p. 594)
naturalism (p. 594)
modernism (p. 595)
American Protective Association

(p. 600)

Social Gospel (p. 600)
fundamentalism (p. 602)

REVIEW QUESTIONS  Answer these questions to demonstrate your

understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  Why  did  athletics  become  popular  in  the  late-
nineteenth-century  United  States?  In  what  ways
did this trend represent broader changes in Ameri-
can society and culture?

2.  What changes in women’s private and public lives
occurred  in  the  decades  after  the  Civil  War,  and
how  did  these  affect  women  from  different  back-
grounds? Why do you think emphasis on the status
of “ladies” became so insistent in this era?

