604

PART 6

  CHAPTER REVIEW

3.  Some historians argue that the changes brought by
industrialization  caused  Americans  to  become  a
more secular people. To what extent do you agree
or disagree, and why? Use evidence from this chap-
ter to make your case.

4.  What  policy  changes  resulted,  in  part,  from
Americans’ new zest for outdoor recreation? (You
may also want to review Chapter 16, pp. 521 and
524–525  on  John  Wesley  Powell,  the  creation  of
Yellowstone, and early wildlife conservation.)

5.  THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING  On the Part 6
thematic timeline (p. 543), review developments in
“Ideas, Beliefs, and Culture” and “Environment and
Geography.”  How  did  industrialization  change
Americans’ relationship to the outdoors — to natu-
ral  environments?  What  connections  do  you  see
between those changes and other, broader shifts in
American society and culture?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  This  chapter
explains  cultural  transformation  as  largely  the
result  of  industrialization.  That’s  true,  but  it’s  not
the  whole  story:  the  Civil  War  also  helped  bring
about  change.  Organizers  of  the  WCTU,  for  ex-
ample,  were  distressed  by  alcoholism  among  the
industrial  working  class  but  also  by  the  plight  of
veterans,  some  of  whom  anaesthetized  their  war
wounds through heavy drinking. Review the mate-
rial in Chapters 14 and 15, on the Civil War and its
aftermath,  and  then  write  an  essay  in  which  you
explain  how  changes  in  American  society  during
the Civil War and Reconstruction laid the ground-
work for new controversies in the areas of race rela-
tions, reform, science, and religious faith.

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  This chapter contains sev-
eral  depictions  of  domestic  spaces,  and  also  of
women in public. After studying these images, how
would you describe the ideal roles that Americans
of this era believed women should fulfill? Did the
ideal  differ,  based  on  social  and  economic  class?
Compare  these  images  to  the  photographs  of
women in this chapter. What differences do you see
between  the  “ideal”  depictions  and  the  ways  in
which  real  women  appeared  in  front  of  the
camera?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Patrick W. Carey, The Roman Catholics in America
(1996). A major synthesis of American Catholic
history.

Stephen Fox, The American Conservation Movement
(1985). A history of the rise of environmentalism.

Glenda Gilmore, Gender and Jim Crow (1996). An
influential account of African American women’s
activism in reform and politics.

Clifford Putney, Muscular Christianity (2001). A good
introduction to the new ideas of masculinity that

emerged in this period, and their impact on religious
faith.

Jonathan Sarna, American Judaism (2004). Provides
an excellent account of the negotiations between
Americanized Jews and new Eastern European
immigrants in this era.

David Shi, Facing Facts (1994). Explores the impact
of realism and scientific thinking on the arts and
intellectual life.

