“Civilization’s Inferno”: The Rise
and Reform of Industrial Cities
1880–1917

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
How did the rise of large cities shape
American society and politics?

Clarence  Darrow,  a  successful  law-

yer from Ashtabula, Ohio, felt iso-
lated  and  overwhelmed  when  he
moved to Chicago in the 1880s. “There is
no place so lonely to a young man as a great city,” Darrow later wrote. “When I walked
along the street I scanned every face I met to see if I could not perchance discover some-
one from Ohio.” Instead, he saw a “sea of human units, each intent upon hurrying by.”
At one point, Darrow felt near despair. “If it had been possible I would have gone back
to Ohio,” he wrote, “but I didn’t want to borrow the money, and I dreaded to confess
defeat.”

In  the  era  of  industrialization,  more  and  more  Americans  had  experiences  like
Darrow’s. In 1860, the United States was rural: less than 20 percent of Americans lived
in an urban area, deﬁned by census takers as a place with more than 2,500 inhabitants.
By 1910, more Americans lived in cities (42.1 million) than had lived in the entire nation
on the eve of the Civil War (31.4 million). The country now had three of the world’s ten
largest cities (America Compared, p. 611). Though the Northeast remained by far the
most urbanized region, the industrial Midwest was catching up. Seattle, San Francisco,
and soon Los Angeles became hubs on the Paciﬁc coast. Even the South boasted of
thriving  Atlanta  and  Birmingham.  As  journalist  Frederic  C.  Howe  declared  in  1905,
“Man has entered on an urban age.”

The scale of industrial cities encouraged experiments that ranged from the amuse-
ment park to the art museum, the skyscraper to the subway. Yet the city’s complexity
also posed problems, some of them far worse than Clarence Darrow’s loneliness. Broth-
els  ﬂourished,  as  did  slums,  pollution,  disease,  and  corrupt  political  machines.  Fast-
talking  hucksters  enjoyed  prime  opportunities  to  ﬂeece  newcomers;  homeless  men
slept in the shadows of the mansions of the superrich. One African American observer
called  the  city  “Civilization’s  Inferno.”  The  locus  of  urgent  problems,  industrial  cities
became important sites of political innovation and reform.

19

C H A P T E R

THE NEW METROPOLIS
The Shape of the Industrial City

Newcomers and Neighborhoods

City Cultures

GOVERNING THE
GREAT CITY

Urban Machines

The Limits of Machine

Government

CRUCIBLES OF
PROGRESSIVE REFORM

Fighting Dirt and Vice

The Movement for Social

Settlements

Cities and National Politics

606

