608

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

The New Metropolis
Mark Twain, arriving in New York in 1867, remarked,
“You cannot accomplish anything in the way of busi-
ness, you cannot even pay a friendly call without devot-
ing a whole day to it. . . . [The] distances are too great.”
But new technologies allowed engineers and planners
to reorganize urban geographies. Specialized districts
began to include not only areas for finance, manufac-
turing, wholesaling, and warehousing but also immi-
grant wards, shopping districts, and business-oriented
downtowns. It was an exciting and bewildering world.

The Shape of the Industrial City
Before the Civil War, cities served the needs of com-
merce and finance, not industry. Early manufacturing
sprang up mostly in the countryside, where mill own-
ers could draw water power from streams, find plenti-
ful  fuel  and  raw  materials,  and  recruit  workers  from
farms and villages. The nation’s largest cities were sea-
ports; urban merchants bought and sold goods for dis-
tribution into the interior or to global markets.

As

industrialization  developed,  though,  cities
became sites for manufacturing as well as finance and
trade. Steam engines played a central role in this change.
With  them,  mill  operators  no  longer  had  to  depend
on  less reliable  water  power.  Steam  power  also  vastly
increased  the  scale  of  industry.  A  factory  employing
thousands of workers could instantly create a small city
such  as  Ali quippa,  Pennsylvania,
which belonged body and soul to
the  Jones  and  Laughlin  Steel
Company. Older commercial cit-
ies also industrialized. Warehouse
districts  converted  to  small-scale
manufacturing.  Port  cities  that
served  as  immigrant  gateways
offered abundant cheap labor, an essential element in
the industrial economy.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How were America’s
industrial cities different
from the typical city before
1860?

Mass  Transit  New  technologies  helped  residents
and visitors negotiate the industrial city. Steam-driven
cable  cars  appeared  in  the  1870s.  By  1887,  engineer
Frank Sprague designed an electric trolley system for
Richmond, Virginia. Electricity from a central generat-
ing plant was fed to trolleys through overhead power
lines, which each trolley touched with a pole mounted
on its roof. Trolleys soon became the primary mode of
transportation  in  most  American  cities.  Congestion
and frequent accidents, however, led to demands that

trolley lines be moved off streets. The “el” or elevated
railroad,  which  began  operation  as  early  as  1871  in
New York City, became a safer alternative. Other urban
planners  built  down,  not  up.  Boston  opened  a  short
underground line in 1897; by 1904, a subway running
the length of Manhattan demonstrated the full poten-
tial of high-speed underground trains.

Even before the Civil War, the spread of railroads
led  to  growth  of  outlying  residential  districts  for  the
well-to-do. The high cost of transportation effectively
segregated  these  wealthy  districts.  In  the  late  nine-
teenth century, the trend accelerated. Businessmen and
professionals  built  homes  on  large,  beautifully  land-
scaped lots in outlying towns such as Riverside, Illinois,
and  Tuxedo  Park,  New  York.  In  such  places,  affluent
wives and children enjoyed refuge from the pollution
and perceived dangers of the city.

Los  Angeles  entrepreneur  Henry  Huntington,
nephew  of  a  wealthy  Southern  Pacific  Railroad  mag-
nate, helped foster an emerging suburban ideal as  he
pitched  the  benefits  of  southern  California  sunshine.
Huntington invested his family fortune in Los Angeles
real estate and transportation. Along his trolley lines,
he  subdivided  property  into  lots  and  built  rows  of
bungalows,  planting  the  tidy  yards  with  lush  trees
and  tropical  fruits.  Middle-class  buyers  flocked  to
purchase Huntington’s houses. One exclaimed, “I have
apparently  found  a  Paradise  on  Earth.”  Anticipating
love  for  affordable
twentieth-century  Americans’
single-family homes near large cities, Huntington had
begun to invent southern California sprawl.

Skyscrapers  By the 1880s, invention of steel girders,
durable  plate  glass,  and  passenger  elevators  began  to
revolutionize  urban  building  methods.  Architects
invented  the  skyscraper,  a  building  supported  by  its
steel  skeleton.  Its  walls  bore  little  weight,  serving
instead as curtains to enclose the structure. Although
expensive  to  build,  skyscrapers  allowed  downtown
landowners to profit from small plots of land. By invest-
ing in a skyscraper, a landlord could collect rent for ten
or  even  twenty  floors  of  space.  Large  corporations
commissioned  these  striking  designs  as  symbols  of
business prowess.

The first skyscraper was William Le Baron Jenney’s
ten-story Home Insurance Building (1885) in Chicago.
Though  unremarkable  in  appearance — it  looked  just
like other downtown buildings — Jenney’s steel-girder
construction inspired the creativity of American archi-
tects.  A  Chicago  school  sprang  up,  dedicated  to  the
design of buildings whose form expressed, rather than
masked,  their  structure  and  function.  The  presiding

