CHAPTER 19

  “Civilization’s Inferno”: The Rise and Reform of Industrial Cities, 1880–1917

609

Woolworth Building, New
York City

Under construction in this photo-
graph, taken between 1910 and
1913, the headquarters of the
nationwide Woolworth’s ﬁve-and-
dime chain became a dominant
feature of the New York skyline.
Manhattan soon had more sky-
scrapers than any other city in
the world. Library of Congress.

genius  of  this  school  was  architect  Louis  Sullivan,
whose  “vertical  aesthetic”  of  set-back  windows  and
strong columns gave skyscrapers a “proud and soaring”
presence and offered plentiful natural light for workers
inside.  Chicago  pioneered  skyscraper  construction,
but New York, with its unrelenting demand for prime
downtown space, took the lead by the late 1890s. The
fifty-five-story Woolworth Building, completed in 1913,
marked the beginning of Manhattan’s modern skyline.

The  Electric  City  One of the most dramatic urban
amenities  was  electric  light.  Gaslight,  produced  from
coal gas, had been used for residential light since the
early nineteenth century, but gas lamps were too dim
to brighten streets and public spaces. In the 1870s, as
generating  technology  became  commercially  viable,
electricity proved far better. Electric arc lamps, installed
in  Wanamaker’s  department  store  in  Philadelphia  in
1878, astonished viewers with their brilliant illumina-
tion.  Electric  streetlights  soon  replaced  gaslights  on
city streets.

Before it had a significant effect on industry, elec-
tricity gave the city its modern tempo. It lifted eleva-
tors, illuminated department store windows, and above
all,  turned  night  into  day.  Electric  streetlights  made
residents feel safer; as one magazine put it in 1912, “A
light is as good as a policeman.” Nightlife became less
risky  and  more  appealing.  One  journalist  described
Broadway in 1894: “All the shop fronts are lighted, and

the entrances to the theaters blaze out on the sidewalk.”
At the end of a long working day, city dwellers flocked
to  this  free  entertainment.  Nothing,  declared  an
observer, matched the “festive panorama” of Broadway
“when the lights are on.”

Newcomers and Neighborhoods
Explosive  population  growth  made  cities  a  world  of
new arrivals, including many young women and men
arriving  from  the  countryside.  Traditionally,  rural
daughters  had  provided  essential  labor  for  spinning
and  weaving  cloth,  but  industrialization  relocated
those tasks from the household to the factory. Finding
themselves  without  a  useful  household  role,  many
farm daughters sought paid employment. In an age of
declining  rural  prosperity,  many  sons  also  left  the
farm  and — like  immigrants  arriving  from  other
countries — set aside part of their pay to help the folks
at  home.  Explaining  why  she  moved  to  Chicago,  an
African American woman from Louisiana declared, “A
child with any respect about herself or hisself wouldn’t
like to see their mother and father work so hard and
earn nothing. I feel it my duty to help.”

America’s cities also became homes for millions of
overseas immigrants. Most numerous in Boston were
the  Irish;  in  Minneapolis,  Swedes;  in  other  northern
cities, Germans. Arriving in a great metropolis, immi-
grants confronted many difficulties. One Polish man,

