610

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

Lighting Up Minneapolis, 1883

Like other American cities, Minneapolis
at night had been lit by dim gaslight until
the advent of Charles F. Brush’s electric arc
lamps. This photograph marks the opening
day, February 28, 1883, of Minneapolis’s
new era: the ﬁrst lighting of a 257-foot
tower topped by a ring of electric arc
lamps. The electric poles on the right,
connecting the tower to a power station,
would soon proliferate into a blizzard of
poles and overhead wires, as Minneapolis
became an electric city. © Minnesota Historical
Society/CORBIS.

who had lost the address of his American cousins, felt
utterly  alone  after  disembarking  at  New  York’s  main
immigration  facility,  Ellis  Island,  which  opened  in
1892. Then he heard a kindly voice in Polish, offering
to help. “From sheer joy,” he recalled, “tears welled up
in my eyes to hear my native tongue.” Such experiences
suggest why immigrants stuck together, relying on rel-
atives and friends to get oriented and find jobs. A high
degree  of  ethnic  clustering  resulted,  even  within  a
single  factory.  At  the  Jones  and  Laughlin  steelworks

in  Pittsburgh,  for  example,  the  carpentry  shop  was
German, the hammer shop Polish, and the blooming
mill Serbian. “My people . . . stick together,” observed a
son of Ukrainian immigrants. But he added, “We who
are  born  in  this  country . . . feel  this  country  is  our
home.”

Patterns of settlement varied by ethnic group. Many
Italians,  recruited  by  padroni,  or  labor  bosses,  found
work  in  northeastern  and  Mid-Atlantic  cities.  Their
urban  concentration  was  especially  marked  after  the

