612

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

The San Francisco Earthquake

California’s San Andreas Fault had caused earthquakes for centuries — but when a major metropolis arose
nearby, it created new potential for catastrophe. The devastating earthquake of April 18, 1906, occurred at
5:12 A.M., when many residents were sleeping. This photograph of Sacramento Street shows the resulting
devastation and ﬁres. The quake probably killed over 2,000 people, though the exact number will never be
known. A massive 296-mile rupture along the fault, felt as far away as Los Angeles, Oregon, and central
Nevada, the earthquake refuted contemporary geological theories. It prompted researchers to open new
lines of inquiry aimed at predicting tremors — and constructing urban buildings that could withstand them.
Universal History Archive / UIG / The Bridgeman Art Library.

1880s, as more and more laborers arrived from south-
ern Italy. The attraction of America was obvious to one
young  man,  who  had  grown  up  in  a  poor  southern
Italian farm family. “I  had never gotten any wages of
any  kind  before,”  he  reported  after  settling  with  his
uncle in New Jersey. “The work here was just as hard as
that on the farm; but I didn’t mind it much because I
would receive what seemed to me like a lot.” Amadeo
Peter Giannini, who started off as a produce merchant
in San Francisco, soon turned to banking. After the San
Francisco  earthquake  in  1906,  his  Banca  d’Italia  was
the  first  financial  institution  to  reopen  in  the  Bay
area. Expanding steadily across the West, it eventually
became Bank of America.

Like  Giannini’s  bank,  institutions  of  many  kinds
sprang  up  to  serve  ethnic  urban  communities.
Throughout America, Italian speakers avidly read the
newspaper  Il  Progresso  Italo-Americano;  Jews,  the
Yiddish-language Jewish Daily Forward, also published
in New York. Bohemians gathered in singing societies,

while New York Jews patronized a lively Yiddish theater.
By 1903, Italians in Chicago had sixty-six mutual  aid
societies, most composed of people from a particular
province or town. These societies collected dues from
members and paid support in case of death or disabil-
ity on the job. Mutual benefit societies also functioned
as fraternal clubs. “We are strangers in a strange coun-
try,”  explained  one  member  of  a  Chinese  tong,  or
mutual aid society, in Chicago. “We must have an orga-
nization  (tong)  to  control  our  country  fellows  and
develop our friendship.”

Sharply defined ethnic neighborhoods such as San
Francisco’s Chinatown, Italian North Beach, and Jewish
Hayes  Valley  grew  up  in  every  major  city,  driven  by
both  discrimination  and  immigrants’  desire  to  stick
together (Map 19.1). In addition to patterns of ethnic
and racial segregation, residential districts in almost all
industrial cities divided along lines of economic class.
Around  Los  Angeles’s  central  plaza,  Mexican  neigh-
borhoods diversified, incorporating Italians and Jews.

