614

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

The Cherry Family, 1906

Wiley and Fannie Cherry migrated in
1893 from North Carolina to Chicago,
settling in the small African American
community that had established itself
on the city’s West Side. The Cherrys
apparently prospered. By 1906, when
this family portrait was taken, they had
entered the black middle class. When
migration intensiﬁed after 1900, longer-
settled urban blacks like the Cherrys often
became uncomfortable, and relations with
needy rural newcomers were sometimes
tense. Collection of Lorraine Heflin/Picture
Research Consultants & Archives.

women took up work in the service sector, becoming
porters, laundrywomen, and domestic servants.

Blacks  faced  another  urban  danger:  the  so-called
race  riot, an attack by white mobs triggered by street
altercations or rumors of crime. One of the most viru-
lent  episodes  occurred  in  Atlanta,  Georgia,  in  1906.
The violence was fueled by a nasty political campaign
that  generated  sensational  false  charges  of  “negro
crime.”  Roaming  bands  of  white  men  attacked  black
Atlantans, invading middle-class black neighborhoods
and in one case lynching two barbers after seizing them
in  their  shop.  The  rioters  killed  at  least  twenty-four
blacks and wounded more than a hundred. The disease
of hatred was not limited to the South. Race riots broke
out  in  New  York  City’s  Tenderloin  district  (1900);

Evansville,  Indiana  (1903);  and  Springfield,  Illinois
(1908).  By  then,  one  journalist  observed,  “In  every
important Northern city, a distinct race-problem already
exists  which  must,  in  a  few  years,  assume  serious
proportions.”

Whether  they  arrived  from  the  South  or  from
Europe,  Mexico,  or  Asia,  working-class  city  residents
needed cheap housing near their jobs (Map 19.2). They
faced  grim  choices.  As  urban  land  values  climbed,
speculators  tore  down  houses  that  were  vacated  by
middle-class families moving away from the industrial
core. In their place, they erected five- or six-story tene-
ments, buildings that housed twenty or more families
in cramped, airless apartments (Figure 19.1). Tene ments
fostered rampant disease and horrific infant mortality.

