CHAPTER 19

  “Civilization’s Inferno”: The Rise and Reform of Industrial Cities, 1880–1917

615

York’s  Tenement  House  Law  of  1901,  which  required
interior  courts,  indoor  toilets,  and  fire  safeguards  for
new structures. The law, however, had no effect on the
44,000  tenements  that  already  existed  in  Manhattan
and the Bronx. Reformers were thwarted  by the eco-
nomic facts of urban development. Industrial workers
could  not  afford  transportation  and  had  to  live  near
their  jobs;  commercial  development  pushed  up  land
values. Only high-density, cheaply built housing earned
landlords a significant profit.

City Cultures
Despite  their  dangers  and  problems,  industrial  cities
could be exciting places to live. In the nineteenth cen-
tury,  white  middle-class  Protestants  had  set  the  cul-
tural standard; immigrants and the poor were expected
to follow cues from their betters, seeking “uplift” and
respectability. But in the cities, new mass-based enter-
tainments emerged among the working classes, espe-
cially  youth.  These  entertainments  spread  from  the
working  class  to  the  middle  class — much  to  the  dis-
tress of many middle-class parents. At the same time,
cities became stimulating centers for intellectual life.

Urban  Amusements  One  enticing  attraction  was
vaudeville theater, which arose in the 1880s and 1890s.
Vaudeville customers could walk in anytime and watch
a  continuous  sequence  of  musical  acts,  skits,  magic
shows, and other entertainment. First popular among
the  working  class,  vaudeville  quickly  broadened  its
appeal to include middle-class audiences. By the early
1900s, vaudeville faced competition from early movie
theaters, or nickelodeons, which offered short films for
a nickel entry fee. With distaste, one reporter described
a typical movie audience as “mothers of bawling infants”
and “newsboys, bootblacks, and smudgy urchins.” By
the 1910s, even working girls who refrained from less
respectable  amusements  might  indulge  in  a  movie
once or twice a week.

More spectacular were the great amusement parks
that  appeared  around  1900,  most  famously  at  New
York’s Coney Island. These parks had their origins in
world’s  fairs,  whose  paid  entertainment  areas  had
offered giant Ferris wheels and camel rides through “a
street  in  Cairo.”  Entrepreneurs
found  that  such  attractions  were
big  business.  Between  1895  and
1904,  they  installed  them  at  sev-
eral  rival  amusement  parks  near
Coney  Island’s  popular  beaches.
The parks offered New Yorkers a

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did working-class and
elite city residents differ
in how they spent their
money and leisure time?

The Atlanta Race Riot — Seen from France

The cover of this Paris newsmagazine depicts the Atlanta race
riot of 1906. While the artist had almost certainly never vis-
ited Atlanta, his dramatic illustration shows that, from this
early date, racial violence could be a source of embarrassment
to the United States in its relations with other countries.
Picture Research Consultants & Archives.

In New York’s Eleventh Ward, an average of 986 per-
sons occupied each acre. One investigator in Philadel-
phia described twenty-six people living in nine rooms
of a tenement. “The bathroom at the rear of the house
was used as a kitchen,” she reported. “One privy com-
partment in the yard was the sole toilet accommoda-
tion for the five families living in the house.” African
Americans  often  suffered  most.  A  study  of  Albany,
Syracuse,  and  Troy,  New  York,  noted,  “The  colored
people are relegated to the least healthful buildings.”

Denouncing these conditions, reformers called for
model  tenements  financed  by  public-spirited  citizens
willing to accept a limited return on their investment.
When private philanthropy failed to make a dent, cities
turned to housing codes. The most advanced was New

