616

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

MAP 19.2
The Expansion of Chicago, 1865–1902

In 1865, Chicagoans depended on horsecar
lines to get around town. By 1900, the
city limits had expanded enormously and
so had the streetcar service, which was by
then electriﬁed. Elevated trains eased the
congestion on downtown streets. Ongoing
extension of the streetcar lines, some beyond
the city limits, ensured that suburban
development would continue as well.

The residential areas of
the city tended to spread
out along elevated (light-
rail) railroad lines and
streetcar tracks. These new
forms of mass transit
enabled people living in
distant neighborhoods to
reach the central business
district and other places
of employment.

Note that the number
of square miles within
Chicago’s city limits
increased more than
300 percent between
1865 and 1902.

Note that some areas of the old city
were not used for either residence
or industry. Most of these were large
regional parks or undeveloped land.

0

1

2

3 miles

Central Business District
Industrial area
Residential area
Parks and undeveloped land
Elevated lines, 1902
Streetcar lines, 1902

City limits,
1902

W

N

S

E

Lake
Michigan

Central
Business
District

Horsecar lines, 1865

City limits,
1865

Lake
Calumet

Parlor

Kitchen

Bed
Room

Bed
Room

Parlor

Kitchen

Bed
Room

Bed
Room

Air Shaft
(Toilets)

Public       Hall

Air Shaft
50'0"

Bed
Room

Bed
Room

Kitchen

Parlor

Kitchen

Parlor

10'

e
p
a
c
s
E
e
r
i
F

FIGURE 19.1
Floor Plan of a Dumbbell Tenement

In a contest for a design that met an
1879 requirement for every room to have
a window, the dumbbell tenement won. The
interior indentation, which created an airshaft
between adjoining buildings, gave the tene-
ment its “dumbbell” shape. But what was
touted as a model tenement demonstrated
instead the futility of trying to reconcile
maximum land usage with decent housing.
Each ﬂoor contained four apartments of three
or four rooms, the largest only 10 by 11 feet.
The two toilets in the hall became ﬁlthy or
broke down under daily use by forty or more
people. The narrow airshaft provided almost
no light for the interior rooms and served
mainly as a dumping ground for garbage.
So deplorable were these tenements that
they became the stimulus for the next wave
of New York housing reform.

