CHAPTER 19

  “Civilization’s Inferno”: The Rise and Reform of Industrial Cities, 1880–1917

617

Amusement Park, Long Beach, California

The origins of the roller coaster go back to a
Switchback Railway installed at New York’s Coney
Island in 1884, featuring gentle dips and curves. By
1900, when the Jack Rabbit Race was constructed at
Long Beach, California, the goal was to create the
biggest possible thrill. Angelenos journeyed by trolley
to Long Beach to take a dip in the ocean as well as
to ride the new roller coaster — and the airplane ride
in the foreground. © Curt Teich Postcard Archives, Lake
County Museum.

chance to come by ferry, escape the hot city, and enjoy
roller coasters, lagoon plunges, and “hootchy-kootchy”
dance shows. Among the amazed observers was Cuban
revolutionary  José  Martí,  working  as  a  journalist  in
the United States. “What facilities for every pleasure!”
Martí  wrote.  “What  absolute  absence  of  any  outward
sadness or poverty! . . . The theater, the photographers’
booth, the bathhouses!” He concluded that Coney Island
epitomized  America’s  commercial  society,  driven  not
by  “love  or  glory”  but  by  “a  desire  for  gain.”  Similar
parks grew up around the United States. By the sum-
mer  of  1903,  Philadelphia’s  Willow  Grove  counted
three million visitors annually; so did two amusement
parks outside Los Angeles.

Ragtime  and  City  Blues  Music  also  became  a
booming  urban  entertainment.  By  the  1890s,  Tin
Pan  Alley,  the  nickname  for  New  York  City’s  song-
publishing  district,  produced  such  national  hit  tunes
as “A Bicycle Built for Two” and “My Wild Irish Rose.”
The  most  famous  sold  more  than  a  million  copies of
sheet music, as well as audio recordings for the newly
invented  phonograph.  To  find  out  what  would  sell,
publishers had musicians play at New York’s working-
class  beer  gardens  and  dance  halls.  One  publishing
agent, who visited “sixty joints a week” to test new songs,
declared that “the best songs came from the gutter.”

African American musicians brought a syncopated
beat  that  began,  by  the  1890s,  to  work  its  way  into
mainstream  hits  like  “A  Hot  Time  in  the  Old  Town
Tonight.” Black performers became stars in their own
right with the rise of  ragtime. This music, apparently
named for its ragged rhythm, combined a steady beat
in  the  bass  (played  with  the  left  hand  on  the  piano)
with syncopated, off-beat rhythms in the treble (played

with the right). Ragtime became wildly popular among
audiences of all classes and races who heard in its infec-
tious  rhythms  something  exciting — a  decisive  break
with Victorian hymns and parlor songs.

For the master of the genre, composer Scott Joplin,
ragtime  was  serious  music.  Joplin,  the  son  of  former
slaves, grew up along the Texas-Arkansas border and
took piano lessons as a boy from a German teacher. He
and other traveling performers introduced ragtime to
national audiences at the Chicago World’s Fair in 1893.
Seeking to elevate African American music and secure
a broad national audience, Joplin warned pianists, “It
is  never  right  to  play  ‘Ragtime’  fast.”  But  his  instruc-
tions were widely ignored. Young Americans embraced
ragtime.

They also embraced each other, as ragtime ushered
in an urban dance craze. By 1910, New York alone had
more  than  five  hundred  dance  halls.  In  Kansas  City,
shocked guardians of morality counted 16,500 dancers
on the floor on a Saturday night; Chicago had 86,000.
Some  young  Polish  and  Slovak  women  chose  restau-
rant jobs rather than domestic service so they would
have  free  time  to  visit  dance  halls  “several  nights  a
week.”  New  dances  like  the  Bunny  Hug  and  Grizzly
Bear  were  overtly  sexual:  they  called  for  close  body
contact and plenty of hip movement. In fact, many of
these dances originated in brothels. Despite widespread
denunciation,  dance  mania  quickly  spread  from  the
urban working classes to rural and middle-class youth.
By the 1910s, black music was achieving a central
place in American popular culture. African American
trumpet player and bandleader W. C. Handy, born in
Alabama, electrified national audiences by performing
music drawn from the cotton fields of the Mississippi
Delta. Made famous when it reached the big city, this

