618

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

music became known as the blues. Blues music spoke
of hard work and heartbreak, as in Handy’s popular hit
“St. Louis Blues” (1914):

Got de St. Louis Blues jes blue as I can be,
Dat man got a heart lak a rock cast in the sea,
Or else he wouldn’t gone so far from me.

Blues spoke to the emotional lives of young urbanites
who  were  far  from  home,  experiencing  dislocation,
loneliness,  and  bitter  disappointment  along  with  the
thrills of city life. Like Coney Island and other leisure
activities, ragtime and blues helped forge new collec-
tive experiences in a world of strangers.

Ragtime and blues spread quickly and had a pro-
found  influence  on  twentieth-century  American  cul-
ture.  By  the  time  Handy  published  “St.  Louis  Blues,”
composer Irving Berlin, a Russian Jewish immigrant,
was  introducing  altered  ragtime  pieces  into  musical
theater — which  eventually  transferred  to  radio  and
film.  Lyrics often  featured  sexual  innuendo,  as  in  the
title of Berlin’s hit song “If You Don’t Want My Peaches
(You’d Better Stop Shaking My Tree).” The popularity
of such music marked the arrival of modern youth cul-
ture. Its enduring features included “crossover” music
that originated in the black working class and a com-
mercial  music  industry  that  brazenly  appropriated
African American musical styles.

Sex  and  the  City
In  the  city,  many  young  people
found  parental  oversight  weaker  than  it  had  been
before. Amusement parks and dance halls helped fos-
ter the new custom of dating, which like other cultural
innovations  emerged  first  among  the  working  class.
Gradually,  it  became  acceptable  for  a  young  man  to
escort a young woman out on the town for commercial
entertainments  rather  than  spending  time  at  home
under a chaperone’s watchful eye. Dating opened a new
world of pleasure, sexual adventure, and danger. Young
women headed to dance halls alone to meet men; the
term gold digger came into use to describe a woman who
wanted a man’s money more than the man himself.

But young women, not men, proved most vulner-
able  in  the  system  of  dating.  Having  less  money  to
spend because they earned half or less of men’s wages,
working-class girls relied on the “treat.” Some tried to
maintain  strict  standards  of  respectability,  keenly
aware that their prospects for marriage depended on a
virtuous  reputation.  Others  became  so-called  charity
girls, eager for a good time. Such young women, one
investigator  reported,  “offer  themselves  to  strangers,
not  for  money,  but  for  presents,  attention  and  plea-
sure.” For some women, sexual favors were a matter of

practical necessity. “If I did not have a man,” declared
one waitress, “I could not get along on my wages.” In
the anonymous city, there was not always a clear line
between working-class treats and casual prostitution.

Dating and casual sex were hallmarks of an urban
world in which large numbers of residents were young
and  single.  The  1900  census  found  that  more  than
20  percent  of  women  in  Detroit,  Philadelphia,  and
Boston  lived  as  boarders  and  lodgers,  not  in  family
units; the percentage topped 30 percent in St. Paul and
Minne apolis. Single men also found social opportuni-
ties in the city. One historian has called the late nine-
teenth  century  the  Age  of  the  Bachelor,  a  time  when
being an unattached male lost its social stigma. With
boardinghouses,  restaurants,  and  abundant  personal
services, the city afforded bachelors all the comforts of
home  and,  on  top  of  that,  an  array  of  men’s  clubs,
saloons, and sporting events.

Many  industrial  cities  developed  robust  gay  sub-
cultures.  New  York’s  gay  underground,  for  example,
included an array of drinking and meeting places, as
well  as  clubs  and  drag  balls.  Middle-class  men,  both
straight and gay, frequented such venues for entertain-
ment or to find companionship. One medical student
remembered  being  taken  to  a  ball  at  which  he  was
startled  to  find  five  hundred  gay  and  lesbian  couples
waltzing to “a good band.” By the 1910s, the word queer
had  come  into  use  as  slang  for  homosexual.  Though
harassment  was  frequent  and  moral  reformers  like
Anthony Comstock issued regular denunciations of sex-
ual “degeneracy,” arrests were few. Gay sex shows and
saloons were lucrative for those who ran them (and for
police, who took bribes to look the other way, just as
they did for brothels). The exuberant gay urban subcul-
ture offered a dramatic challenge to Victorian ideals.

High Culture  For elites, the rise of great cities offered
an opportunity to build museums, libraries, and other
cultural  institutions  that  could  flourish  only  in  major
metropolitan  centers.  Millionaires  patronized  the  arts
partly to advance themselves socially but also out of a
sense  of  civic  duty  and  national  pride.  As  early  as  the
1870s,  symphony  orchestras  emerged  in  Boston  and
New  York.  Composers  and  conductors  soon  joined
Europe  in new  experiments. The  Metropolitan  Opera,
founded in 1883 by wealthy businessmen, drew enthusi-
astic  crowds  to  hear  the  innovative  work  of  Richard
Wagner. In 1907, the Met shocked audiences by present-
ing Richard Strauss’s sexually scandalous opera Salome.
Art  museums  and  natural  history  museums  also
became  prominent  new  institutions  in  this  era.  The
nation’s first major art museum, the Corcoran Gallery

