CHAPTER 19

  “Civilization’s Inferno”: The Rise and Reform of Industrial Cities, 1880–1917

619

of Art, opened in Washington, D.C., in 1869, while New
York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art settled into its per-
manent  home  in  1880.  In  the  same  decades,  public
libraries grew from modest collections into major urban
institutions.  The  greatest  library  benefactor  was  steel
magnate  Andrew  Carnegie,  who  announced  in  1881
that he would build a  library in any town or city that
was  prepared  to  maintain  it.  By  1907,  Carnegie  had
spent more than $32.7 million to establish over a thou-
sand libraries throughout the United States.

Urban  Journalism  Patrons  of  Carnegie’s  libraries
could read, in addition to books, an increasing array of
mass-market  newspapers.  Joseph  Pulitzer,  owner  of
the St. Louis Post-Dispatch and New York World, led the
way in building his sales base with sensational investi-
gations, human-interest stories, and targeted sections
covering sports and high society. By the 1890s, Pulitzer
faced  a  challenge  from  William  Randolph  Hearst
(Thinking  Like  a  Historian,  p.  620).  The  arrival  of
Sunday  color  comics  featuring  the  “Yellow  Kid”  gave
such publications the name yellow journalism, a derog-
atory term for mass-market newspapers. Hearst’s and
Pulitzer’s sensational coverage was often irresponsible.
In the late 1890s, for example, their papers helped whip
up  frenzied  pressure  for  the  United  States  to  declare
war against Spain (Chapter 21). But Hearst and Pulitzer
also  exposed  scandals  and  injustices.  They  believed
their papers should challenge the powerful by speaking
to and for ordinary Americans.

Along with Hearst’s and Pulitzer’s stunt reporters,
other urban journalists also worked to promote reform.
New magazines such as McClure’s introduced national
audiences to reporters such as Ida Tarbell, who exposed
the  machinations  of  John  D.  Rockefeller,  and  David
Graham Phillips, whose “Treason of the Senate,” pub-
lished in Cosmopolitan in 1906, documented the defer-
ence  of  U.S.  senators — especially  Republicans — to
wealthy  corporate  interests.  Theodore  Roosevelt  dis-
missed  such  writers  as  muckrakers  who  focused  too
much on the negative side of American life. The term
stuck, but  muckrakers’  influence  was  profound. They
inspired thousands of readers to get involved in reform
movements  and  tackle  the  problems  caused  by
industrialization.

Governing the Great City
One  of  the  most  famous  muckrakers  was  Lincoln
Steffens,  whose  book  The  Shame  of  the  Cities  (1904),
first published serially in McClure’s magazine, denounced

the corruption afflicting America’s urban governments.
Steffens used dramatic language to expose “swindling”
politicians. He claimed, for example, that the mayor of
Minneapolis had turned his city over to “outlaws.” In
St. Louis, “bribery was a joke,” while Pittsburgh’s Demo-
cratic Party operated a  private company that handled
most  of  the  city’s  street-paving  projects — at  a  hefty
profit.  Historians  now  believe  that  Steffens  and  other
middle-class  crusaders  took  a  rather  extreme  view
of  urban  politics;  the  reality  was  more  complex.  But
charges  of  corruption  could  hardly  be  denied.  As
industrial  cities  grew  with  breathtaking  speed,  they
posed a serious problem of governance.

Urban Machines
In  the  United  States,  cities  relied  largely  on  private
developers to build streetcar lines and provide urgently
needed water, gas, and electricity. This preference for
business solutions gave birth to what  one urban his-
torian calls the “private city” — an urban environment
shaped  by  individuals  and  profit-seeking  businesses.
Private enterprise, Americans believed, spurred great
innovations — trolley cars, electric lighting, skyscrap-
ers — and drove urban real estate development. Invest-
ment  opportunities  looked  so  tempting,  in  fact,  that
new cities sprang up almost overnight from the ruins
of a catastrophic Chicago fire in 1871 and a major San
Francisco  earthquake  in  1906.  Real  estate  interests
were often instrumental in encouraging streetcar lines
to build outward from the central districts.

When contractors sought city business, or saloon-
keepers  needed  licenses,  they  turned  to  political
machines:  local  party  bureaucracies  that  kept  an
unshakable grip on both elected and appointed public
offices. A machine like New York’s infamous Tammany
Society — known  by  the  name  of  its  meeting  place,
Tammany Hall — consisted of layers of political func-
tionaries.  At  the  bottom  were  precinct  captains  who
knew every city neighborhood and block; above them
were  ward  bosses  and,  at  the  top,  powerful  citywide
leaders,  who  had  usually  started  at  the  bottom  and
worked  their  way  up.  Machines  dispensed  jobs  and
patronage,  arranged  for  urban  services,  and  devoted
their energies to staying in office, which they did, year
after year, on the strength of their political clout and
popularity among urban voters.

For  constituents,  political  machines  acted  as  a
rough-and-ready social service agency, providing jobs
for the jobless or a helping hand for a bereaved family.
Tammany  ward  boss  George  Washington  Plunkitt,
for  example,  reported  that  he  arranged  housing  for

