T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Making Mass Media:

Newspaper Empires

Among  the  businesses  that  served  urban  consumers  were  mass-market  news-
papers.  Joseph  Pulitzer’s  New  York  World  led  the  way  in  the  1880s;  a  decade
later Pulitzer had a powerful rival in the New York Journal, owned by William
Randolph Hearst.

1.  R. F. Outcault’s “The Yellow Kid” comic, The World,
August 9, 1896. Pulitzer and Hearst introduced
Sunday color comics, including “The Yellow Kid”
(shown here on a bicycle). Working-class readers
instantly recognized the “kid,” slang that then
referred to working-class immigrant children. The
Kid, like other boys of his age, wore skirts; tene-
ment toddlers’ heads were shaved to discourage
lice.

The World, Sunday, August 9, 1896.

2.  Editorial, Wheeling Register, April 6, 1885. A West
Virginia newspaper commented on a campaign by
the New York World to complete the Statue of Lib-
erty. Parts of the statue, donated by France, were
languishing in New York City parks.

The New York World is a liberty-loving journal. It has
taken the responsibility of being foster mother to that

620

much abused piece of bronze called the “BARTHOLDI
statue.” It begins to look as if the World may nurse it to a
successful termination by raising funds enough through
public contributions to complete the pedestal upon which
it is to stand. Success to the enterprise.

3.  “HOMELESS, HOPELESS! Nellie Bly in a Night

Haunt of the City’s Wretchedest of Women,” New
York World, February 9, 1896. Pulitzer and Hearst
hired many “stunt reporters.” The most famous
was Elizabeth Jane Cochrane, who took her pen
name, Nellie Bly, from a popular song. In 1892,
sponsored by the World, Bly beat the record in
Jules Verne’s famous novel Around the World
in Eighty Days, circumnavigating the world in
seventy-two days. She ﬁled many investigative
pieces such as this one.

An old woman stood with her back against the side of a
building. Over her head was a ragged shawl that had once
been red. Around her knees hung a limp and shapeless
calico skirt. The rain and sleet were falling steadily and
lay thick and slushy upon the streets.

I shivered as I stopped to watch. . . . If the old woman
felt the cold she gave no sign. She stood motionless, peep-
ing around the corner. Her eyes were fixed upon the door
of the Oak Street Station-House.

Just then three small boys, unmindful of the weather,

came trudging down the street . . . industriously gather-
ing every white spot that showed upon the pavement to
add to the black snowballs they held in their wet red hands.
Turning the corner suddenly they came upon the old
woman. For a second they paused and looked at her and
she glared at them. It reminded me of the way dogs
behave when they turn a corner and espy a cat. . . . The
old woman started on a frantic hobble across the street,
the boys after her. Their black snowballs landed squarely
and soakingly against her bent back. . . . The old woman
shouted things as she ran, things that do not sound well
and are never by any chance reproduced in print, but they
seemed to increase the delight of the fiendish boys. . . .
She could hobble she made for the station-house and the
boys pursued her, pelting her.

