4.  Lewis Wickes Hine, newsboys sell-
ing at a Hartford, Connecticut
saloon, 9:30 P.M., March 1909.
In addition to subscriptions and
sales at newsstands, newspapers
sold bundles of one hundred
papers to boys and girls, who
resold as many as they could. Pho-
tographer Lewis Hine’s caption,
included below, suggests one
strategy for selling papers. Hine,
working for the National Child
Labor Committee, took many such
images.

A common case of “team work.” The
smaller boy . . . goes into one of the
saloons and sells his “last” papers. Then
comes out and his brother gives him
more. Joseph said, “Drunks are me best
customers. . . . Dey buy me out so I kin
go home.” He sells every afternoon and
night. Extra late Saturday. At it again at
6 a.m.

Library of Congress.

5.  Newsboys strike coverage, New York Herald-

Tribune, July 25, 1899. As sales plummeted after
the War of 1898, Pulitzer and other newspaper
titans raised the cost of a newspaper bundle, for
children who resold them, from 50 to 60 cents.
Newsboys struck. They failed to get the 50-cent
price reinstated, but the World and other compa-
nies agreed to buy back unsold papers, which they
had not done before. Kid Blink, the strike leader,
was blind in one eye.

The newsboys’ strike gathered new strength last night in a
monster mass meeting held at New Irving Hall. . . . “Kid”
Blink, who has been made Grand Master Workman of the
union, led the procession. . . . The unbiased spectator last
evening could not fail to be impressed with the resolute,
manly fight the little fellows are making. . . .

SPEECH OF “KID” BLINK
. . . Dis is de time when we’se got to stick togedder like

glue! But der’s one ting I want ter say before I goes any
furder. I don’t believe in getting’ no feller’s papers frum
him and tearin’ ’em up. I know I done it. (Cries of “You
bet you did!”) But I’m sorry fer it. No! der ain’t nuttin in
dat. We know wot we wants and we’ll git it. . . . Dem 10
cents is as good ter us as to de millionaires — maybe bet-
ter. . . . We’ll strike and restrike till we get it. . . . We’ll
stick togedder like plaster, won’t we, boys?
The boys answered that they would.

6.  Circulation statistics for the New York World from
N. W. Ayer and Son’s American Newspaper Annual
and Directory, 1910.

Edition

Political
affiliation

Morning

Democratic

Evening

Independent

Sunday

Democratic

No. of
Pages

16

12–16

56–72

Circulation

361,412

410,259

459,663

Sources: (2) Wheeling Register, April 6, 1885; (3) New York World, February 9, 1896;
(5) New York Herald-Tribune, July 25, 1899; (6) N. W. Ayer and Son’s American
Newspaper Annual and Directory (Philadelphia: N. W. Ayer and Son, 1910), 623.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Based on these sources, why do you think “yellow jour-

nalism” was popular and proﬁtable? What audiences did
it serve, and how?

2.  Consider the tone and point of view of sources 1, 3,

and 5. What do they suggest about American attitudes
toward the urban poor?

3.  What do these sources say about how Pulitzer and

Hearst viewed their role as publishers? How might we
compare their newspaper empires to other corporations
of the industrial era (Chapter 17)?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Write a brief essay in which you explain the ways in which
the rise of mass-market newspapers might have contributed
to and helped to publicize calls for progressive reform.

621

