622

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

families after their apartments burned, “fix[ing] them
up until they get things runnin’ again.” Plunkitt was an
Irishman,  and  so  were  most  Tammany  Hall  leaders.
But by the 1890s, Plunkitt’s Fifteenth District was fill-
ing up with Italians and Russian Jews. On a given day
(as recorded in his diary), he might attend an Italian
funeral in the afternoon and a Jewish wedding in the
evening. Wherever he went, he brought gifts, listened
to  his  constituents’  troubles,  and  offered  a  helping
hand.

The  favors  dispensed  by  men  like  Plunkitt  came
via  a  system  of  boss  control  that  was,  as  Lincoln
Steffens  charged,  corrupt.  Though  rural,  state,  and
national  politics  were  hardly  immune  to  such  prob-
lems,  cities  offered  flagrant  opportunities  for  bribes
and  kickbacks.  The  level  of  corruption,  as  Plunkitt
observed, was greater in cities, “accordin’ to the oppor-
tunities.” When politicians made contracts for city ser-
vices, some of the money ended up in their pockets. In
the  1860s,  William  Marcy  Tweed,  known  as  Boss
Tweed, had made Tammany Hall a byword for corrup-
tion,  until  he  was  brought  down  in  1871  by  flagrant
overpricing of contracts for a lavish city courthouse.
Thereafter, machine corruption became more surrep-
titious.  Plunkitt  declared  that  he  had  no  need  for
outright  bribes.  He  favored  what  he  called  “honest
graft” — the  profits  that  came  to  savvy  insiders  who
knew  where  and  when  to  buy  land.  Plunkitt  made
most of his money building wharves on Manhattan’s
waterfront.

Middle-class  reformers  condemned  immigrants
for  supporting  machines.  But  urban  immigrants
believed  that  few  middle-class  Americans  cared
about  the  plight  of  poor  city  folk  like  themselves.
Machines were hardly perfect, but immigrants could
rely  on  them  for  jobs,  emergency  aid,  and  the  only
public services they could hope to obtain. Astute com-
mentators saw that bosses dominated city government
because  they  provided  what  was  needed,  with  no
condescending  moral  judgments.  As  reformer  Jane
Addams put it, the ward boss was a “stalking survival
of  village  kindness.”  Voters  knew  he  was  corrupt,
but on election day they might say, “Ah, well, he has
a  big  Irish  heart.  He  is  good  to  the  widow  and  the
fatherless,”  or,  “he  knows  the  poor.”  Addams  con-
cluded that middle-class reform-
ers  would  only  make  headway  if
they  set  aside  their  prejudices,
learned to “stand by and for and
with  the  people,”  and  did  a  bet-
ter  job  of  it  than  the  machine
bosses did.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
Why, given that everyone
agreed machines were
corrupt, did urban voters
support them?

To see a longer excerpt of the Jane Addams essay,
along with other primary sources from this period,
see Sources for America’s History.

Machine-style governments achieved some notable
successes. They arranged (at a profit) for companies to
operate streetcars, bring clean water and gaslight, and
remove  garbage.  Nowhere  in  the  world  were  there
more massive public projects — aqueducts, sewage sys-
tems, bridges, and spacious parks — than in the great
cities of the United States. The nature of this achieve-
ment can be grasped by comparing Chicago, Illinois,
with  Berlin,  the  capital  of  Germany,  in  1900.  At  that
time,  Chicago’s  waterworks  pumped  500  million  gal-
lons of water a day, providing 139 gallons per resident;
Berliners made do with 18 gallons each. Flush toilets, a
rarity in Berlin, could be found in 60 percent of Chicago
homes.  Chicago  lit  its  streets  with  electricity,  while
Berlin still relied mostly on gaslight. Chicago had twice
as many parks as the German capital, and it had just
completed an ambitious sanitation project that reversed
the course of the Chicago River, carrying sewage into
Lake Michigan, away from city residents.

These  achievements  were  remarkable,  because
labored  under
Amer ican  municipal  governments
severe  political  constraints.  Judges  did  grant  cities
some authority: in 1897, for example, New York’s state
supreme court ruled that New York City was entirely
within its rights to operate a municipally owned sub-
way. Use  of private land was also subject to whatever
regulations a city might impose. But, starting with an
1868 ruling in Iowa, the American legal system largely
classified the city as a “corporate entity” subject to state
control.  In  contrast  to  state  governments,  cities  had
only a limited police power, which they could use, for
example, to stop crime but not to pass more ambitious
measures  for  public  welfare.  States,  not  cities,  held
most  taxation  power  and  received  most  public  reve-
nues.  Machines  and  their  private  allies  flourished,  in
part, because cities were starved for legitimate cash.

Thus  money  talked;  powerful  economic  interests
warped  city  government.  Working-class  residents —
even  those  loyal  to  their  local  machines — knew  that
the newest electric lights and best trolley lines served
affluent  neighborhoods,  where  citizens  had  the  most
clout. Hilda Satt, a Polish immigrant who moved into a
poor Chicago neighborhood in 1893, recalled garbage-
strewn streets and filthy backyard privies. “The streets
were paved with wooden blocks,” she later wrote, “and
after  a  heavy  rainfall  the  blocks  would  become  loose
and  float  about  in  the  street.”  She  remembered  that
on  one  such  occasion,  local  pranksters  posted  a  sign

