CHAPTER 19

  “Civilization’s Inferno”: The Rise and Reform of Industrial Cities, 1880–1917

623

City Garbage

“How to get rid of the garbage?” was a question that bedeviled every American city. The difﬁculties of keep-
ing up are all too clear in this ground-level photograph by the great urban investigator Jacob Riis, looking
down Tammany Street in New York City around 1890. Museum of the City of New York.

saying,  “The  Mayor  and  the  Aldermen  are  Invited  to
Swim  Here.”  As  cities  expanded,  the  limitations  of
political machines became increasingly clear.

The Limits of Machine Government
The scale of urban problems became dramatically evi-
dent in the depression of the 1890s, when unemploy-
ment  reached  a  staggering  25  percent  in  some  cities.
Homelessness and hunger were rampant; newspapers
nationwide  reported  on  cases  of  starvation,  despera-
tion, and suicide. To make matters worse, most cities

had abolished the early-nineteenth-century system of
outdoor relief, which provided public support for the
indigent. Fearing the system promoted laziness among
the poor, middle-class reformers had insisted on pri-
vate, not public, charity. Even cities that continued to
provide outdoor relief in the 1890s were overwhelmed
by the magnitude of the crisis. Flooded with “tramps,”
police  stations  were  forced  to  end  the  long-standing
practice of allowing homeless individuals to sleep inside.
Faced  with  this  crisis,  many  urban  voters  proved
none  too  loyal  to  the  machines  when  better  alterna-
tives arose. Cleveland, Ohio, for example, experienced

