624

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

eighty-three  labor  strikes  between  1893  and  1898.
Workers’  frustration  centered  on  corrupt  businesses
with close ties to municipal officials. The city’s Central
Labor  Union,  dissatisfied  with  Democrats’  failure  to
address  its  concerns,  worked  with  middle-class  allies
to  build  a  thriving  local  branch  of  the  People’s  Party
(Chapter 20). Their demands for stronger government
measures,  especially  to  curb  corporate  power,  culmi-
nated  in  citywide  protests  in  1899  during  a  strike
against  the  hated  streetcar  company.  That  year,  more
than eight thousand workers participated in the city’s
annual Labor Day parade. As they passed the mayor’s
reviewing  stand,  the  bands  fell  silent  and  the  unions
furled their flags in a solemn protest against the may-
or’s failure to support their cause.

To  recapture  support  from  working-class  Cleve-
landers, Democrats made a dramatic change in 1901,
nominating  Tom  Johnson  for  mayor.  Johnson,  a
reform-minded  businessman,  advocated  municipal
ownership  of  utilities  and  a  tax  system  in  which
“monopoly  and  privilege”  bore  the  main  burdens.
(Johnson once thanked Cleveland’s city appraisers for
raising taxes on his own mansion.) Johnson’s comfort-
able  victory  transformed  Democrats  into  Cleveland’s
leading reform party. While the new mayor did not ful-
fill the whole agenda of the Central Labor Union and
its allies, he became an advocate of publicly owned util-
ities, and one of the nation’s most famous and innova-
tive reformers.

Like Johnson, other mayors began to oust machines
and launch ambitious programs of reform. Some mod-
eled their municipal governments on those of Glasgow,
Scotland;  Düsseldorf,  Germany;  and  other  European
cities  on  the  cutting  edge  of  innovation.  In  Boston,
Mayor Josiah Quincy built public baths, gyms, swim-
ming pools, and playgrounds and provided free public
concerts. Like other mayors, he battled streetcar com-
panies to bring down fares. The scope of such projects
varied.  In  1912,  San  Francisco  managed  to  open  one
small  municipally  owned  streetcar  line  to  compete
with private companies. Milwaukee, Wisconsin, on the
other hand, elected socialists who experimented with a
sweeping array of measures, including publicly subsi-
dized medical care and housing.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
How did reformers try
to address the limits of
machine government?
To what extent did they
succeed?

Republican  Hazen  Pingree,
mayor  of  Detroit  from  1890  to
1897,  was  a  particularly  noted
reformer  who  worked  for  better
streets and public transportation.
During  the  depression,  Pingree
opened  a  network  of  vacant
city-owned  lots  as  community

vegetable  gardens.  Though  some  people  ridiculed
“Pingree’s  Potato  Patches,”  the  gardens  helped  feed
thousands  of  Detroit’s  working  people  during  the
harsh depression years. By 1901, a coalition of reform-
ers  who  campaigned  against  New  York’s  Tammany
Hall  began  to  borrow  ideas  from  Pingree  and  other
mayors.  In  the  wealthier  wards  of  New  York,  they
promised  to  reduce  crime  and  save  taxpayer  dollars.
In working-class neighborhoods, they vowed to pro-
vide  affordable  housing  and  municipal  ownership  of
gas  and  electricity.  They  defeated  Tammany’s  candi-
dates, and though they did not fulfill all of their prom-
ises, they did provide more funding for overcrowded
public schools.

Reformers  also  experimented  with  new  ways  of
organizing municipal government itself. After a devas-
tating hurricane in 1900 killed an estimated six thou-
sand people in Galveston, Texas, and destroyed much
of  the  city,  rebuilders  adopted  a  commission  system
that became a nationwide model for efficient govern-
ment. Leaders of the National Municipal League advised
cities to elect small councils and hire professional city
managers who would direct operations like a corporate
executive. The league had difficulty persuading politi-
cians to adopt its business-oriented model; it won its
greatest  victories  in  young,  small  cities  like  Phoenix,
Arizona,  where  the  professional  classes  held  political
power. Other cities chose, instead, to enhance demo-
cratic  participation.  As  part  of  the  Oregon  System,
which  called  for  direct  voting  on  key  political  ques-
tions,  Portland  voters  participated  in  129  municipal
referendum votes between 1905 and 1913.

Crucibles of Progressive
Reform
The  challenges  posed  by  urban  life  presented  rich
opportunities for experimentation and reform. As hap-
pened  in  Cleveland  with  Tom  Johnson’s  election  as
mayor, working-class radicals and middle-class reform-
ers often mounted simultaneous challenges to political
machines,  and  these  combined  pressures  led  to  dra-
matic change. Many reformers pointed to the plight of
the urban poor, especially children. Thus it is not sur-
prising that progressivism, an overlapping set of move-
ments to combat the ills of industrialization (Chapter
20), had important roots in the city. In the slums and
tenements of the metropolis, reformers invented new
forms of civic participation that shaped the course of
national politics.

