CHAPTER 19

  “Civilization’s Inferno”: The Rise and Reform of Industrial Cities, 1880–1917

625

Fighting Dirt and Vice
As early as the 1870s and 1880s, news reporters drew
attention  to  corrupt  city  governments,  the  abuse  of
power  by  large  corporations,  and  threats  to  public
health. Researcher Helen Campbell reported on tene-
ment  conditions  in  such  exposés  as  Prisoners  of
Poverty  (1887).  Making  innovative  use  of  the  inven-
tion  of  flash  photography,  Danish-born  journalist
Jacob Riis included photographs of tenement interiors
in  his  famous  1890  book,  How  the  Other  Half  Lives.
Riis had a profound influence on Theodore Roosevelt
when the future president served as New York City’s
police commissioner. Roosevelt asked Riis to lead him
on  tours  around  the  tenements,  to  help  him  better
understand  the  problems  of  poverty,  disease,  and
crime.

Cleaning  Up  Urban  Environments  One  of  the
most urgent problems of the big city was disease. In the
late  nineteenth  century,  scientists  in  Europe  came  to
understand  the  role  of  germs  and  bacteria.  Though

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What prompted the rise
of urban environmental
and antiprostitution cam-
paigns?

researchers  could  not  yet  cure
epidemic diseases, they could rec-
ommend  effective  measures  for
prevention. Following up on New
York City’s victory against cholera
in 1866 — when government offi-
cials  instituted  an  effective  quarantine  and  prevented
large numbers of deaths — city and state officials began
to champion more public health projects. With a major
clean-water  initiative  for  its  industrial  cities  in  the
late nineteenth century, Massachusetts demonstrated
that  it  could  largely  eliminate  typhoid  fever.  After  a
horrific yellow fever epidemic in 1878 that killed per-
haps 12 percent of its population, Memphis, Tennessee,
invested  in  state-of-the-art  sewage  and  drainage.
Though the new system did not eliminate yellow fever,
it unexpectedly cut death rates from typhoid and chol-
era, as well as infant deaths from water-borne disease.
Other cities followed suit. By 1913, a nationwide sur-
vey  of  198  cities  found  that  they  were  spending  an
average of $1.28 per resident for sanitation and other
health measures.

A Hint to Boards of Health

In 1884, Frank Leslie’s Illustrated Newspaper
urged municipal and state boards of health
to work harder to protect urban children.
When this cartoon appeared, New Yorkers
were reading shocking reports of milk deal-
ers who diluted milk with borax and other
chemicals. Note the range of health threats
that the cartoonist identiﬁes. Rutherford B.
Hayes Presidential Center.

