626

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

The  public  health  movement  became  one  of  the
era’s most visible and influential reforms. In cities, the
impact  of  pollution was  obvious.  Children  played  on
piles of garbage, breathed toxic air, and consumed poi-
soned  food,  milk,  and  water.  Infant  mortality  rates
were  shocking:  in  the  early  1900s,  a  baby  born  to  a
Slavic woman in an American city had a 1 in 3 chance
of dying in infancy. Outraged, reformers mobilized to
demand  safe  water  and  better  garbage  collection.
Hygiene  reformers  taught  hand-washing  and  other
techniques to fight the spread of tuberculosis.

Americans  worked  in  other  ways  to  make  indus-
trial cities healthier and more beautiful to live in. Many
municipalities adopted smoke-abatement laws, though
they  had  limited  success  with  enforcement  until  the
post–World  War  I  adoption  of  natural  gas,  which
burned  cleaner  than  coal.  Recreation  also  received
attention.  Even  before  the  Civil  War,  urban  planners
had  established  sanctuaries  like  New  York’s  Central

Park, where city people could stroll, rest, and contem-
plate natural landscapes. By the turn of the twentieth
century, the “City Beautiful” movement arose to advo-
cate more and better urban park spaces. Though most
parks still featured flower gardens and tree-lined paths,
they also made room for skating rinks, tennis courts,
baseball  fields,  and  swimming  pools.  Many  included
play  areas  with  swing  sets  and  seesaws,  promoted  by
the National Playground Association as a way to keep
urban children safe and healthy.

Closing  Red  Light  Districts  Distressed  by  the
commercialization  of  sex,  reformers  also  launched  a
campaign against urban prostitution. They warned, in
dramatic language, of the threat of white slavery, alleg-
ing (in spite of considerable evidence to the contrary)
that large numbers of young white women were being
kidnapped  and  forced  into  prostitution.  In  The  City’s
Perils  (1910),  author  Leona  Prall  Groetzinger  wrote

The Crusade Against “White Slavery”

With the growth of large cities, prostitution was a
major cause of concern in the Progressive Era. Though
the number of sex workers per capita in the United
States was probably declining by 1900, the presence
of red light districts was obvious; thousands of young
women (as well as a smaller number of young men)
were exploited in the sex trade. This image appeared
in The Great War on White Slavery, published by the
American Purity Foundation in 1911. It illustrates how
immigrant women could be ensnared in the sex trade
by alleged “friends” who offered them work. Reformers’
denunciations of “white slavery” show an overt racial
bias: while antiprostitution campaigners reported on
the exploitation of Asian and African American women,
the victimization of white women received the greatest
emphasis and most effectively grabbed the attention of
prosperous, middle-class Americans. From The Great War
on White Slavery, by Clifford G. Roe, 1911. Courtesy Vassar
College Special Collections.

