CHAPTER 19

  “Civilization’s Inferno”: The Rise and Reform of Industrial Cities, 1880–1917

627

that young women arrived from the countryside “burn-
ing with high hope and filled with great resolve, but the
remorseless  city  takes  them,  grinds  them,  crushes
them, and at last deposits them in unknown graves.”

Practical investigators found a more complex real-
ity: women entered prostitution as a result of many fac-
tors, including low-wage jobs, economic desperation,
abandonment,  and  often  sexual  and  domestic  abuse.
Women  who  bore  a  child  out  of  wedlock  were  often
shunned by their families and forced into prostitution.
Some  working  women  and  even  housewives  under-
took casual prostitution to make ends meet. For decades,
female  reformers  had  tried  to  “rescue”  such  women
and  retrain  them  for  more  respectable  employments,
such as sewing. Results were, at best, mixed. Efforts to
curb demand — that is, to focus on arresting and pun-
ishing men who employed prostitutes — proved unpop-
ular with voters.

Nonetheless,  with  public  concern  mounting  over
“white slavery” and the payoffs machine bosses exacted
from brothel keepers, many cities appointed vice com-
missions  in  the  early  twentieth  century.  A  wave  of
brothel  closings  crested  between  1909  and  1912,  as
police  shut  down  red  light  districts  in  cities  nation-
wide.  Meanwhile,  Congress  passed  the  Mann  Act
(1910)  to  prohibit  the  transportation  of  prostitutes
across state lines.

The  crusade  against  prostitution  accomplished  its
main  goal,  closing  brothels,  but  in  the  long  term  it
worsened  the  conditions  under  which  many  prosti-
tutes  worked.  Though  conditions  in  some  brothels
were  horrific,  sex  workers  who  catered  to  wealthy
clients made high wages and were relatively protected
by madams, many of whom set strict rules for clients
and  provided  medical  care  for  their  workers.  In  the
wake  of  brothel  closings,  such  women  lost control  of
the prostitution business. Instead, almost all sex work-
ers became “streetwalkers” or “call girls,” more vulner-
able  to  violence  and  often  earning  lower  wages  than
they had before the antiprostitution crusade began.

The Movement for Social Settlements
Some urban reformers focused their energies on build-
ing  a  creative  new  institution,  the  social  settlement.
These  community  welfare  centers  investigated  the
plight of the urban poor, raised funds to address urgent
needs, and helped neighborhood residents advocate on
their own behalf. At the movement’s peak in the early
twentieth  century,  dozens  of  social  settlements  oper-
ated  across  the  United  States.  The  most  famous,  and
one of the first, was Hull House on Chicago’s West Side,
founded in 1889 by Jane Addams and her companion
Ellen  Gates  Starr. Their  dilapidated  mansion,  flanked

Hull House Playground,
Chicago, 1906

When this postcard was made,
the City of Chicago’s Small Parks
Commission had just taken over
management of the playground
from settlement workers at Hull
House, who had created it. In a
pattern repeated in many cities,
social settlements introduced
new institutions and ideas —
such as safe places for urban
children to play — and inspired
municipal authorities to assume
responsibility and control. Picture
Research Consultants & Archives.

