628

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
What were the origins
of social settlements, and
how did they develop
over time?

by  saloons  in  a  neighborhood
of  Italian  and  Eastern  European
immigrants,  served  as  a  spark
plug  for  community  improve-
ment and political reform.

partly

The idea for Hull House came
from  Toynbee  Hall,  a
London settlement that Addams and Starr had visited
while  touring  Europe.  Social  settlements  also  drew
inspiration from U.S. urban missions of the 1870s and
1880s. Some of these, like the Hampton Institute, had
aided former slaves during Reconstruction; others, like
Grace Baptist in Philadelphia, arose in northern cities.
To meet the needs of urban residents, missions offered
employment counseling, medical clinics, day care cen-
ters,  and  sometimes  athletic  facilities  in  cooperation
with the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA).
Jane Addams, a daughter of the middle class, first
expected Hull House to offer art classes and other cul-
tural  programs  for  the  poor.  But  Addams’s  views
quickly changed as she got to know her new neighbors
and  struggled  to  keep  Hull  House  open  during  the
depression  of  the  1890s.  Addams’s  views  were  also
influenced  by  conversations  with  fellow  Hull  House
resident  Florence  Kelley,  who  had  studied  in  Europe
and returned a committed socialist. Dr. Alice Hamilton,
who opened a pediatric clinic at Hull House, wrote that
Addams  came  to  see  her  settlement  as  “a  bridge
between the classes. . . . She always held that this bridge
was as much of a help to the well-to-do as to the poor.”
Settlements  offered  idealistic  young  people  “a  place
where they could live as neighbors and give as much as
they could of what they had.”

Addams and her colleagues believed that working-
class Americans already knew what they needed. What
they lacked were resources to fulfill those needs, as well
as a political voice. These, settlement workers tried to
provide.  Hull  House  was  typical  in  offering  a  bath-
house, playground, kindergarten, and day care center.
Some  settlements  opened  libraries  and  gymnasiums;
others operated penny savings banks and cooperative
kitchens where tired mothers could purchase a meal at
the  end  of  the  day.  (Addams  humbly  closed  the  Hull
House  kitchen  when  she  found  that  her  bland  New
England  cooking  had  little  appeal  for  Italians;  her
coworker,  Dr.  Alice  Hamilton,  soon  investigated  the
health  benefits  of  garlic.)  At  the  Henry  Street  Settle-
ment  in  New  York,  Lillian  Wald  organized  visiting
nurses to improve health in tenement wards. Addams,
meanwhile,  encouraged  local  women  to  inspect  the
neighborhood and bring back a list of dangers to health
and safety. Together, they prepared a complaint to city

council. The women, Addams wrote, had shown “civic
enterprise  and  moral  conviction”  in  carrying  out  the
project themselves.

Social settlements took many forms. Some attached
themselves to preexisting missions and African Ameri-
can colleges. Others were founded by energetic college
graduates.  Catholics  ran  St.  Elizabeth  Center  in  St.
Louis;  Jews,  the  Boston  Hebrew  Industrial  School.
Whatever  their  origins,  social  settlements  were,  in
Addams’s words, “an experimental effort to aid in the
solution  of  the  social  and  industrial  problems  which
are  engendered  by  the  modern  condition  of  life  in  a
great city.”

Settlements served as a springboard for many other
projects. Settlement workers often fought city hall to get
better  schools  and  lobbied  state  legislatures  for  new
workplace safety laws. At Hull House, Hamilton inves-
tigated lead poisoning and other health threats at local
factories. Her colleague Julia Lathrop investigated the
plight of teenagers caught in the criminal justice system.
She drafted a proposal for separate juvenile courts and
persuaded  Chicago  to  adopt  it.  Pressuring  the  city  to
experiment with better rehabilitation strategies for juve-
niles  convicted  of  crime,  Lathrop  created  a  model  for
juvenile court systems across the United States.

Another example of settlements’ long-term impact
was the work of Margaret Sanger, a nurse who moved
to New York City in 1911 and volunteered with a Lower
East  Side  settlement.  Horrified  by  women’s  suffering
from  constant  pregnancies — and  remembering  her
devout  Catholic  mother,  who  had  died  young  after
bearing  eleven  children — Sanger  launched  a  crusade
for what she called birth control. Her newspaper col-
umn, “What Every Girl Should Know,” soon garnered
an indictment for violating obscenity laws. The public-
ity that resulted helped Sanger launch a national birth
control movement.

Settlements were thus a crucial proving ground for
many progressive experiments, as well as for the emerg-
ing  profession  of  social  work,  which  transformed  the
provision of public welfare. Social workers rejected the
older model of private Christian charity, dispensed by
well-meaning middle-class volunteers to those in need.
Instead,  social  workers  defined  themselves  as  profes-
sional  caseworkers  who  served  as  advocates  of  social
justice.  Like  many  reformers  of  the  era,  they  allied
themselves with the new social sciences, such as soci-
ology and economics, and undertook statistical surveys
and other systematic methods for gathering facts. Social
work  proved  to  be  an  excellent  opportunity  for  edu-
cated women who sought professional careers. By 1920,
women made up 62 percent of U.S. social workers.

