CHAPTER 19

  “Civilization’s Inferno”: The Rise and Reform of Industrial Cities, 1880–1917

629

Cities and National Politics
Despite reform efforts, the problems wrought by indus-
trialization  continued  to  cause  suffering  in  urban
workplaces  and  environments.  In  1906,  journalist
Upton  Sinclair  exposed  some  of  the  most  extreme
forms  of  labor  exploitation  in  his  novel  The  Jungle,
which described appalling conditions in Chicago meat-
packing plants. What caught the nation’s attention was
not Sinclair’s account of workers’ plight, but his descrip-
tions  of  rotten  meat  and  filthy  packing  conditions.
With  constituents  up  in  arms,  Congress  passed  the
Pure Food and Drug Act (1906) and created the federal
Food and Drug Administration to oversee compliance
with the new law.

The  impact  of  The  Jungle  showed  how  urban
reformers  could  affect  national  politics.  Even  more
significant was the work of Josephine Shaw Lowell, a
Civil War widow from a prominent family. After years
of  struggling  to  aid  poverty-stricken  individuals  in
New York City, Lowell concluded that charity was not
enough.  In  1890,  she  helped  found  the  New  York
Consumers’  League  to  improve  wages  and  working
conditions for female store clerks. The league encour-
aged  shoppers  to  patronize  only  stores  where  wages
and  working  conditions  were  known  to  be  fair.  By
1899, the organization had become the National Con-
sumers’ League (NCL). At  its head stood the outspo-
ken and skillful Florence Kelley, a Hull House worker
and  former  chief  factory  inspector  of  Illinois.  Kelley
believed that only government oversight could protect
exploited workers. Under her crusading leadership, the
NCL  became  one  of  the  most  powerful  progressive
organizations advocating worker protection laws.

Many  labor  organizations  also  began  in  a  single
city  and  then  grew  to  national  stature.  One  famous
example was the Women’s Trade Union League, founded
in New York in 1903. Financed by wealthy women who
supported  its  work,  the  league  trained  working-class
leaders like Rose Schneiderman, who organized unions
among garment workers. Although often frustrated by
the patronizing attitude of elite sponsors, trade-union
women  joined  together  in  the  broader  struggle  for
women’s rights. When New York State held referenda
on women’s suffrage in 1915 and 1917, strong support
came from Jewish and Italian precincts where union-
ized garment workers lived. Working-class voters hoped,
in turn, that enfranchised women would use their bal-
lots to help industrial workers.

Residents of industrial cities, then, sought allies in
state and national politics. The need for broader action
was made clear in New York City by a shocking event

The Jungle

This poster advertises a 1914 silent ﬁlm based on Sinclair’s
reform novel, which tells the story of Lithuanian immigrants
struggling to get by amid the dangerous work, starvation
wages, and abysmal living conditions of Chicago’s meat-
packing district. The ﬁlm launched the ﬁlm careers of actors
George Nash and Gail Kane, who played the hero, Jurgis
Rutkus, and his wife, Ona. Sinclair himself appeared at
the start of the ﬁlm, explaining how he conducted research
for his story. Socialist clubs often screened the ﬁlm, which
ended — like the book — with a ringing call for workers to
organize and create a “cooperative commonwealth” to take
control of their conditions of life and work. Courtesy Lilly Library,
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.

on  March  25,  1911.  On  that  Saturday  afternoon,  just
before  quitting  time,  a  fire  broke  out  at  the  Triangle
Shirtwaist  Company.  It  quickly  spread  through  the
three floors the company occupied at the top of a ten-
story  building.  Panicked  workers  discovered  that,
despite fire safety laws, employers had locked the emer-
gency doors to prevent theft. Dozens of Triangle work-
ers, mostly young immigrant women, were trapped in
the flames. Many leaped to their deaths; the rest never
reached  the  windows.  The  average  age  of  the  146
people who died was just nineteen (American Voices,
p. 630).

