A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

“These Dead Bodies

Were the Answer”:

The Triangle Fire

Entire books have been written about the catastrophic 1911 ﬁre at the Triangle
Shirtwaist  Company  in  New  York  City.  The  following  excerpts  are  from  docu-
ments by four contemporaries who in various ways played a part in the Triangle
tragedy and its aftermath. Note the different audiences that these speakers and
authors were addressing and the lessons that each one draws from this horriﬁc
event.

William G. Shepherd, Reporter

William  G.  Shepherd’s  eyewitness  account  appeared  in
newspapers  across  the  country.  Working  for  the  United
Press,  Shepherd  phoned  the  story  to  his  editor  as  he
watched the unfolding tragedy.

I was walking through Washington Square when a puff
of smoke issuing from a factory building caught my eye.
I reached the building before the alarm was turned in. I
saw every feature of the tragedy visible from outside the
building. I learned a new sound — a more horrible sound
than description can picture. It was the thud of a speed-
ing, living body on a stone sidewalk. . . .

I looked up — saw that there were scores of girls at
the windows. The flames from the floor below were beat-
ing in their faces. Somehow I knew that they, too, must
come down, and something within me — something I
didn’t know was there — steeled me.

I even watched one girl falling. Waving her arms,
trying to keep her body upright until the very instant
she struck the sidewalk, she was trying to balance her-
self. Then came the thud — then a silent, unmoving pile
of clothing and twisted, broken limbs. . . .

On the sidewalk lay heaps of broken bodies. A police-

man later went about with tags, which he fastened with
wire to the wrists of the dead girls, numbering each with
a lead pencil, and I saw him fasten tag no. 54 to the wrist
of a girl who wore an engagement ring. . . .

The floods of water from the firemen’s hose that ran into

the gutter were actually stained red with blood. I looked
upon the heap of dead bodies and I remembered these girls
were the shirtwaist makers. I remembered their great strike
of last year in which these same girls had demanded more
sanitary conditions and more safety precautions in the
shops. These dead bodies were the answer.

Stephen S. Wise, Rabbi

A week after the ﬁre, on April 2, 1911, a memorial meet-
ing was held at the Metropolitan Opera House. One of the
speakers,  Rabbi  Stephen  S.  Wise,  a  prominent  ﬁgure  in
New York reform circles, made the following remarks.

630

This was not an inevitable disaster which man could nei-
ther foresee nor control. We might have foreseen it, and
some of us did; we might have controlled it, but we chose
not to do so. . . . It is not a question of enforcement of law
nor of inadequacy of law. We have the wrong kind of laws
and the wrong kind of enforcement. Before insisting upon
inspection and enforcement, let us lift up the industrial
standards so as to make conditions worth inspecting, and,
if inspected, certain to afford security to workers. . . . And
when we go before the legislature of the state, and demand
increased appropriations in order to ensure the possibility
of a sufficient number of inspectors, we will not forever be
put off with the answer: We have no money.

The lesson of the hour is that while property is good,

life is better; that while possessions are valuable, life is
priceless. The meaning of the hour is that the life of the
lowliest worker in the nation is sacred and inviolable,
and, if that sacred human right be violated, we shall
stand adjudged and condemned before the tribunal
of God and history.

Rose Schneiderman, Trade Unionist

Rose Schneiderman also spoke at the Metropolitan Opera
House meeting. At age thirteen, she had gone to work in
a garment factory like Triangle Shirtwaist’s and, under the
tutelage of the Women’s Trade Union League, had become
a  labor  organizer.  The  strike  she  mentions  in  her  speech
was  popularly  known  as  the  Uprising  of  the  30,000,  a
nearly  spontaneous  walkout  in  1909  that  launched  the
union movement in the women’s garment trades.

I would be a traitor to these poor burned bodies if I
came here to talk good fellowship. We have tried you
good people of the public and we have found you want-
ing. The old Inquisition had its rack and its thumbscrews
and its instruments of torture with iron teeth. We know
what these things are today; the iron teeth are our neces-
sities, the thumbscrews are the high-powered and swift
machinery close to which we must work, and the rack
is here in the firetrap structures that will destroy us the
minute they catch on fire.

