This is not the first time girls have been burned alive

in the city. . . . Every year thousands of us are maimed.
The life of men and women is so cheap and property is
so sacred. There are so many of us for one job it matters
little if 146 of us are burned to death.

We have tried you citizens; we are trying you now, and

you have a couple of dollars for the sorrowing mothers,
brothers, and sisters by way of a charity gift. But every
time the workers come out in the only way they know
to protest against conditions which are unbearable the
strong hand of the law is allowed to press down heavily
upon us . . . [and] beats us back, when we rise, into the
conditions that make life unbearable.

I can’t talk fellowship to you who are gathered here.
Too much blood has been spilled. I know from my expe-
rience it is up to the working people to save themselves.
The only way they can save themselves is by a strong
working-class movement.

Max D. Steuer, Lawyer

After  ﬁnding  physical  evidence  of  the  locked  door  that
had blocked escape from the ﬁre, New York’s district attor-
ney  brought  manslaughter  charges  against  the  Triangle
proprietors,  Max  Blanck  and  Isaac  Harris,  who  hired  in
their  defense  the  best,  highest-priced  trial  attorney  in
town, Max D. Steuer. In this talk, delivered some time later
to  a  rapt  audience  of  lawyers,  Steuer  described  how  he
undermined the testimony of the key witness for the pros-
ecution by suggesting that she had been coached to recite
her  answer.  The  trial  judge  instructed  the  jury  that  they
could only convict Blanck and Harris if it was certain they
had  known  the  emergency  exits  were  locked;  as  Steuer
notes, the jury voted to acquit.

There are many times, many times when a witness has
given evidence very hurtful to your cause and you say,
“No questions,” and dismiss him or her in the hope that
the jury will dismiss the evidence too. [Laughter.] But can
you do that when the jury is weeping, and the little girl
witness is weeping too? [Laughter.] . . . There is one [rule]
that commands what not to do. Do not attack the witness.
Suavely, politely, genially, toy with the story.

In the instant case, about half an hour was consumed

by the examiner [Steuer]. . . . Very little progress was
made; but the tears had stopped. And then [the witness]
was asked, “Now, Rose, in your own words, and in your

own way will you tell the jury everything you did, every-
thing you said, and everything you saw from the moment
you first saw flames.”

The question was put in precisely the same words that
the District Attorney had put it, and little Rose started her
answer with exactly the same word that she had started it
to the District Attorney . . . and the only change in her
recital was that Rose left out one word. And then Rose
was asked, “Didn’t you leave out a word that you put in
when you answered it before?” . . . So Rose started to
repeat to herself the answer [laughter], and as she came to
the missing word she said, “Oh, yes!” and supplied it; and
thereupon the examiner went on to an entirely different
subject. . . . [W]hen again he [asked her to repeat her
story] . . . Rose started with the same word and finished
with the same word, her recital being identical with her
first reply to the same question.

The jurymen were not weeping. Rose had not hurt the

case, and the defendants were acquitted; there was not a
word of reflection at any time during that trial upon poor
little Rose.

Source: Excerpt from Out of the Sweatshop: The Struggle of Industrial Democracy by
Leon Stein, copyright © 1977 by Leon Stein. Used by permission of Quadrangle Books,
an imprint of Random House LLC. All rights reserved. Any third party use of this
material, outside of this publication, is prohibited. Interested parties must apply directly
to Random House LLC for permission.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  The hardest task of the historian is to conjure up the
reality of the past — to say, “This is what it was really
like.” That’s where eyewitness evidence like the reporter
Shepherd’s comes in. What is there in his account that
you could only obtain from an eyewitness?

2.  Both Rabbi Wise and Rose Schneiderman were incensed
at the Triangle carnage, yet their speeches are quite
different. In what ways? What conclusions do you draw
about the different motivations and arguments that led
to reform?

3.  Max Steuer and Rose Schneiderman came from remark-
ably similar backgrounds. They were roughly the same
age, grew up in poverty on the Lower East Side, and
started out as child workers in the garment factories.
The differences in their adult lives speak to the varieties
of immigrant experience in America. Does anything in
their statements help to account for their differing life
paths? What might have happened if Rose Schneider-
man, rather than “little Rose,” had faced Max Steuer on
the witness stand?

631

