632

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did urban reform
movements impact state
and national politics?

Shocked by this horrific event,
New  Yorkers  responded  with  an
outpouring of anger and grief that
crossed ethnic, class, and religious
boundaries.  Many  remembered
that, only a year earlier, shirtwaist
workers  had  walked  off  the  job  to  protest  abysmal
safety and working conditions — and that the owners
of  Triangle,  among  other  employers,  had  broken  the
strike.  Facing  demands  for  action,  New  York  State
appointed  a  factory  commission  that  developed  a
remarkable  program  of  labor  reform:  fifty-six  laws
dealing  with  such  issues  as  fire  hazards,  unsafe
machines,  and  wages  and  working  hours  for  women
and children. The chairman and vice chairman of the
commission  were  Robert  F.  Wagner  and  Alfred  E.
Smith, both Tammany Hall politicians then serving in
the state legislature. They established the commission,
participated fully in its work, and marshaled party reg-
ulars  to  pass  the  proposals  into  law — all  with  the
approval of Tammany. The labor code that resulted was
the most advanced in the United States.

Tammany’s  response  to  the  Triangle  fire  showed
that it was acknowledging its need for help. The social
and economic problems of the industrial city had out-
grown  the  power  of  party  machines;  only  stronger
state  and  national  laws  could  bar  industrial  firetraps,
alleviate  sweatshop  conditions,  and  improve  slums.
Politicians like Wagner and Smith saw that Tammany
had to change or die. The fire had unforeseen further
consequences. Frances Perkins, a Columbia University
student who witnessed the horror of Triangle workers
leaping from the windows to their deaths, decided she
would devote her efforts to the cause of labor. Already
active in women’s reform organizations, Perkins went
to  Chicago,  where  she  volunteered  for  several  years
at Hull House. In 1929, she became New York State’s
first  commissioner  of  labor;  four  years  later,  during
the  New  Deal  (Chapter  23),  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt
appointed  her  as  U.S.  secretary  of  labor — the  first
woman to hold a cabinet post.

The political aftermath of the Triangle fire demon-
strated  how  challenges  posed  by  industrial  cities
pushed politics in new directions, transforming urban
government  and  initiating  broader  movements  for
reform.  The  nation’s  political  and  cultural  standards
had long been set by native-born, Protestant, middle-
class Americans. By 1900, the people who thronged to
the great cities helped build America into a global indus-
trial power — and in the process, created an electorate

that  was  far  more  ethnically,  racially,  and  religiously
diverse.

In  the  era  of  industrialization,  some  rural  and
native-born  commentators  warned  that  immigrants
were “inferior breeds” who would “mongrelize” Amer-
ican  culture.  But  urban  political  leaders  defended
cultural  pluralism,  expressing  appreciation — even
admiration — for immigrants, including Catholics and
Jews, who sought a better life in the United States. At
the  same  time,  urban  reformers  worked  to  improve
conditions of life for the diverse residents of American
cities.  Cities,  then,  and  the  innovative  solutions  pro-
posed by urban leaders, held a central place in America’s
consciousness  as  the  nation  took  on  the  task  of  pro-
gressive reform.

SUMMARY
After 1865, American cities grew at an unprecedented
rate, and urban populations swelled with workers from
rural areas and abroad. To move burgeoning popula-
tions around the city, cities pioneered innovative forms
of mass transit. Skyscrapers came to mark urban sky-
lines,  and  new  electric  lighting  systems  encouraged
nightlife. Neighborhoods divided along class and eth-
nic  lines,  with  the  working  class  inhabiting  crowded,
shoddily built tenements. Immigrants developed new
ethnic  cultures  in  their  neighborhoods,  while  racism
followed African American migrants from the country
to  the  city.  At  the  same  time,  new  forms  of  popular
urban culture bridged class and ethnic lines, challeng-
ing traditional sexual norms and gender roles. Popular
journalism rose to prominence and helped build rising
sympathy for reform.

Industrial cities confronted a variety of new politi-
cal  challenges.  Despite  notable  achievements,  estab-
lished machine governments could not address urban
problems through traditional means. Forward-looking
politicians took the initiative and implemented a range
of political, labor, and social reforms. Urban reformers
also  launched  campaigns  to  address  public  health,
morals, and welfare. They did so through a variety of
innovative institutions, most notably social settlements,
which brought affluent Americans into working-class
neighborhoods  to  learn,  cooperate,  and  advocate  on
behalf  of  their  neighbors.  Such  projects  began  to
increase Americans’ acceptance of urban diversity and
their  confidence  in  government’s  ability  to  solve  the
problems of industrialization.

