CHAPTER 19

  CHAPTER REVIEW

633

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

Chicago school (p. 608)
mutual aid society (p. 612)
race riot (p. 614)
tenement (p. 614)
vaudeville (p. 615)
ragtime (p. 617)
blues (p. 618)
yellow journalism (p. 619)
muckrakers (p. 619)
political machine (p. 619)
National Municipal League

(p. 624)

progressivism (p. 624)
“City Beautiful” movement

(p. 626)

social settlement (p. 627)
Hull House (p. 627)
Pure Food and Drug Act (p. 629)
National Consumers’ League

(p. 629)

Women’s Trade Union League

(p. 629)

Triangle Shirtwaist Fire (p. 629)

Key People

Scott Joplin (p. 617)
Tom Johnson (p. 624)
Jacob Riis (p. 625)
Jane Addams (p. 627)
Margaret Sanger (p. 628)
Upton Sinclair (p. 629)
Florence Kelley (p. 629)

REVIEW QUESTIONS  Answer these questions to demonstrate your

understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  What  were  the  major  features  of  industrial  cities
that arose in the United States in the late nineteenth
and  early  twentieth  centuries?  What  institutions
and
life
innovations  helped  make  urban
distinctive?

2.  What  were  the  limitations  and  achievements  of
urban governments run by political machines?

3.  Why  did  so  many  reform  initiatives  of  the  early
twentieth  century  emerge  in  large  cities?  What
were some of those initiatives, and what was their
political impact?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Using

the
thematic  timeline  on  page  543,  consider  some  of
the ways in which mass migrations of people — both
from  other  countries  and  from  places  within  the
United  States — shaped  industrial  cities.  How  did
this  influence  American  society,  culture,  and
national identity?

