634

PART 6

  CHAPTER REVIEW

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS TIME AND PLACE  In Chapter 17 we
explored  the  activities  of  agrarian  reformers  and
labor unions who protested the impact of industri-
alization on their lives. In Chapters 18 and 19 we
considered  the  work  of  middle-class  and  urban
reformers who sought to address some of the same
conditions.  Chronologically,  their  work  over-
lapped:  note,  for  example,  that  Jane  Addams
founded Hull House in 1889, just as the Farmers’
Alliance was reaching a peak of activism and work-
ers  had  organized  the  Knights  of  Labor  and
American Federation of Labor. Imagine a conver-
sation  among  the  following  individuals:  a  rural
man  or  woman  active  in  the  Farmers’  Alliance;  a
skilled  workman  who
the  American
Federation  of  Labor;  an  urban  antiprostitution
reformer; and a middle-class volunteer who worked
in  a  settlement  house.  How  would  each  have
described  the  problems  caused  by  industrializa-

joined

tion? What remedies would each suggest? On what
points would they have disagreed? Can you imag-
ine  any  issues  on  which  they  might  have  worked
together? What does this suggest about the oppor-
tunities and limits of alliance building, in the late
1800s and early 1900s, across class and geographic
lines?

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  Imagine that you have just
arrived in a  big American city in the early 1900s.
Look carefully at all the images in this chapter and
group them under two categories: (1) problems and
dangers  you  might  have  encountered  as  a  new
urban  resident;  (2)  sights  and  opportunities  that
might have been appealing and exciting to you as a
newcomer.  On  balance,  do  you  think  you  would
have wanted to stay, or turn around and head back
home? Why? What factors might have shaped your
decision?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Jane Addams, Twenty Years at Hull House (1910). An
inspiring must-read by a great American reformer.

George Chauncey, Gay New York (1994). A ground-
breaking study of the rise of urban gay subcultures.

Kathy Peiss, Cheap Amusements (1986). Explores
urban working-class dating and the world of young
working-class women.

Harold Platt, The Electric City (1991). A study of how
electricity shaped the urban industrial society and
economy.

Ruth Rosen, The Lost Sisterhood (1982). A poignant
account of Progressive Era antiprostitution campaigns
and their tragic impact on sex workers.

David Von Drehle, Triangle: The Fire That Changed
America (2003). The most recent account of the fire
and its consequences.

