Whose Government? Politics,
Populists, and Progressives
1880–1917

We  are  living  in  a  grand  and

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
In the Progressive Era, how and why
did  reformers  seek  to  address  the
problems  of  industrial  America?  To
what extent did they succeed?

wonderful time,” declared Kan-
sas  political  organizer  Mary  E.
Lease in 1891. “Men, women and children
are  in  commotion,  discussing  the  mighty
problems  of  the  day.”  This  “movement
among the masses,” she said, was based on the words of Jesus: “Whatsoever ye would
that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them.” Between the 1880s and the
1910s, thousands of reformers like Lease confronted the problems of industrialization.
Lease herself stumped not only for the People’s Party, which sought more government
regulation of the economy, but also for the Knights of Labor and Woman’s Christian
Temperance Union (WCTU), as well as for women’s suffrage and public health.

Between the end of Reconstruction and the start of World War I, political reformers
focused on four main goals: cleaning up politics, limiting the power of big business,
reducing poverty, and promoting social justice. Historians call this period of agitation
and  innovation  the  Progressive  Era.  In  the  1880s  and  1890s,  labor  unions  and  farm
groups took the lead in critiquing the industrial order and demanding change. But over
time,  more  and  more  middle-class  and  elite  Americans  took  up  the  call,  earning  the
name progressives. On the whole, they proposed more limited measures than farmer-
labor  advocates  did,  but  since  they  had  more  political  clout,  they  often  had  greater
success in winning new laws. Thus both radicals and progressives played important roles
in advancing reform.

No single group deﬁned the Progressive Era. On the contrary, reformers took oppo-
site views on such questions as immigration, racial justice, women’s rights, and imperial-
ism. Leaders such as Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson, initially hostile to the
sweeping  critiques  of  capitalism  offered  by  radicals,  gradually  adopted  bolder  ideas.
Dramatic political changes inﬂuenced the direction of reform. Close party competition
in the 1880s gave way to Republican control between 1894 and 1910, followed by a
period of Democratic leadership during Wilson’s presidency (1913–1919). Progressives
gave  the  era  its  name,  not  because  they  acted  as  a  uniﬁed  force,  but  because  they
engaged in diverse, energetic movements to improve America.

20

C H A P T E R

REFORM VISIONS,
1880–1892

Electoral Politics After
Reconstruction

The Populist Program

THE POLITICAL
EARTHQUAKES
OF THE 1890s

Depression and Reaction

Democrats and the “Solid

South”

New National Realities

REFORM RESHAPED,
1901–1912

Theodore Roosevelt as President

Diverse Progressive Goals

The Election of 1912

WILSON AND THE NEW
FREEDOM, 1913–1917

Economic Reforms

Progressive Legacies

636

