638

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

Reform Visions, 1880–1892
In the 1880s, radical farmers’ groups and the Knights
of Labor provided a powerful challenge to industrial-
ization (Chapter 17). At the same time, groups such as
the WCTU (Chapter 18) and urban settlements (Chap-
ter  19)  laid  the  groundwork  for  progressivism,  espe-
cially among women. Though they had different goals,
these groups confronted similar dilemmas upon enter-
ing politics. Should they work through existing politi-
cal parties? Create new ones? Or generate pressure from
the outside? Reformers tried all these strategies.

Electoral Politics After Reconstruction
The end of Reconstruction ushered in a period of fierce
partisan  conflict.  Republicans  and  Democrats  traded
control  of  the  Senate  three  times  between  1880  and
1894, and the House majority five times. Causes of this
tight  competition  included  northerners’  disillusion-
ment  with  Republican  policies
and  the  resurgence  of  southern
Democrats, who regained a strong
base in Congress. Dizzying popu-
lation  growth  also  changed  the
size  and  shape  of  the  House  of
Representatives.  In  1875,  it  counted  243  seats;  two
decades later, that had risen to 356. Between 1889 and
1896,  entry  of  seven  new  western  states — Montana,
North  and  South  Dakota,  Washington,  Idaho,  Wyo-
ming, and Utah — contributed to political instability.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors led to close
party competition in the
1880s?

Heated  competition  and  the  legacies  of  the  Civil
War  drew  Americans  into  politics.  Union  veterans
donned their uniforms to march in Republican parades,
while ex-Confederate Democrats did the same in the
South. When politicians appealed to war loyalties, crit-
ics ridiculed them for “waving the bloody shirt”: whip-
ping up old animosities that ought to be set aside. For
those who had fought or lost beloved family members
in  the  conflict,  however — as  well  as  those  struggling
over African American rights in the South — war issues
remained  crucial.  Many  voters  also  had  strong  views
on  economic  policies,  especially  Republicans’  high
protective  tariffs.  Proportionately  more  voters  turned
out in presidential elections from 1876 to 1892 than at
any other time in American history.

The  presidents  of  this  era  had  limited  room  to
maneuver  in  a  period  of  narrow  victories,  when  the
opposing party often held one or both houses of Con-
gress. Repub licans Rutherford B. Hayes and Benjamin

Harrison  both  won  the  electoral  college  but  lost  the
popular vote. In 1884, Democrat Grover Cleveland won
only 29,214 more votes than his opponent, James Blaine,
while almost half a million voters rejected both major
candidates (Map 20.1). With key states decided by razor-
thin margins, both Republicans and Demo crats engaged
in  vote  buying  and  other  forms  of  fraud.  The  fierce
struggle  for  advantage  also  prompted  innovations  in
political campaigning (Think ing Like a Historian, p. 640).
Some historians have characterized this period as a
Gilded  Age,  when  politics  was  corrupt  and  stagnant
and  elections  centered  on  “meaningless  hoopla.”  The
term  Gilded  Age,  borrowed  from  the  title  of  an  1873
novel cowritten by Mark Twain, suggested that America
had achieved a glittery outer coating of prosperity and
lofty  rhetoric,  but  underneath  suffered  from  moral
decay. Economically, the term Gilded Age seems apt: as
we  have  seen  in previous  chapters,  a  handful  of  men
made  spectacular  fortunes,  and  their  “Gilded”  tri-
umphs belied a rising crisis of poverty, pollution, and
erosion  of  workers’  rights.  But  political  leaders  were
not blind to these problems, and the political scene was
hardly  idle  or  indifferent.  Rather,  Americans  bitterly
disagreed about what to do. Nonetheless, as early as the
1880s,  Congress  passed  important  new  federal  mea-
sures  to  clean  up  corruption  and  rein  in  corporate
power. That decade deserves to be considered an early
stage in the emerging Progressive Era.

New  Initiatives  One  of  the  first  reforms  resulted
from tragedy. On July 2, 1881, only four months after
entering the White House, James Garfield was shot at a
train station in Washington, D.C. (“Assassination,” he
had  told  a  friend,  “can  no  more  be  guarded  against
than  death  by  lightning,  and  it  is  best  not  to  worry
about  either.”)  After  lingering  for  several  agonizing
months, Garfield died. Most historians now believe the
assassin, Charles Guiteau, suffered from mental illness.
But reformers then blamed the spoils system, arguing
that Guiteau had murdered Garfield out of disappoint-
ment  in  the  scramble  for  patronage,  the  granting  of
government jobs to party loyalists.

In the wake of Garfield’s death, Congress passed the
Pendleton Act (1883), establishing a nonpartisan Civil
Service  Commission  to  fill  federal  jobs  by  examina-
tion. Initially, civil service applied to only 10 percent of
such jobs, but the act laid the groundwork for a sweep-
ing  transformation  of  public  employment.  By  the
1910s, Congress extended the act to cover most federal
positions; cities and states across the country enacted
similar laws.

