T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Making Modern

Presidents

Between 1880 and 1917, the stature and powers of the U.S. president grew in
relation to those of Congress. Presidential campaign techniques also changed.
The sources below shed light on candidates’ increasing public visibility and new
uses of campaign funds.

1.  Household sewing machine company adver-
tisement, 1880s. President Grover Cleveland,
a bachelor, married young Frances Folsom in a
quiet White House ceremony in June 1886. The
bride, a college graduate who was twenty-six
years younger than her husband, proved wildly
popular. The Clevelands never authorized polit-
ical or commercial use of the First Lady’s image.
Nonetheless, over their objections, young women
organized “Frankie Cleveland Clubs” to march in
Democratic parades, while companies such as this
one capitalized on her popularity in advertising.

2.  Account of Benjamin Harrison’s front porch cam-

paign in Indianapolis, New York Tribune, October
12, 1888. For much of the nineteenth century, pres-
idential candidates left campaigning to their allies.
A man who promoted himself risked appearing
vain and greedy for ofﬁce. By the 1880s, Republi-
cans began to run “front porch campaigns”: party
leaders arranged for delegations to visit the candi-
date at home.

This morning General Harrison’s home was surrounded
by visitors, who had arrived in the city in the night and
on the early morning trains. . . . There were many relic-
hunters among the early visitors and they swarmed about
the house, taking, without protest from any one, whatever
they were pleased to seize. There is no longer a fence about
the house to be converted into relics, and so the visitors
are taking the trees now. The shrubbery has almost disap-
peared. . . . The informal reception began as soon as the
General got up from [breakfast] and continued until
afternoon. The first delegation was composed of rep-
resentatives of the Cincinnati Republican Clubs. . . . A
delegation from Belleville, Ill., which . . . had patiently
waited for more than four hours, were next invited to
enter the house, and they were accorded the usual hand-
shaking reception. . . .

The parade early in the afternoon was the principal
feature of the day’s demonstration. Two hundred or more
clubs participated and they came from all parts of the
State, representing various classes and interests. . . . There
were mounted men and men on foot, women in wagons
and women in uniform marching, brass bands. . . .

On the balcony beside General Harrison stood his

wife, with several of her lady friends.

Picture Research Consultants & Archives.

640

