3.  Henry George on money in politics, Wheeling
Register, September 19, 1896. Reformer Henry
George was among many who warned of the
inﬂuence of corporate contributions, solicited
brilliantly in 1896 by William McKinley’s cam-
paign manager, Mark Hanna. Short of funds,
Democratic candidate William Jennings Bryan
undertook exhausting nationwide speaking
tours.

There is no question which of the great parties represents
the house of Have and which the house of Want. . . .
Democrat[s] are cramped for want of funds. . . . On the
other hand there is practically “no end of money” at the
disposal of the McKinley committees. . . .

As for the banks, the great railroad companies and
insurance companies, who, even in ordinary times find
it to their interest to help financially one, and frequently
both, sides . . . , their purse strings are unloosed more
freely than ever before, but only in one direction.

The danger to a republican form of government of a
money interest in politics is so clear that it needs not to
be dwelt upon. . . . The steady tendency of American leg-
islation, national and state, has not merely been to create
great special interests, but in the very effort to control
them for the benefit of the public, to concern them
directly in politics.

4.  Theodore Roosevelt on the campaign trail,

1904. Having watched Bryan’s electrifying tours,
Theodore Roosevelt became the ﬁrst winning
candidate to adopt the practice. In 1904, after
a summer front porch campaign, he undertook
a thirty-day speaking tour of the West. To cover
as much ground as possible, Roosevelt often
spoke from the last car of his train.

5.  “Expenses of the Campaign,” Springﬁeld Daily

Republican, September 22, 1900.

It is estimated that it costs $25,000,000 to elect a president
of the United States. The annual allowance which the Brit-
ish Parliament makes to Queen Victoria is $1,925,000 . . .
indicat[ing] that it is much cheaper to maintain a queen
permanently than it is to elect a president. . . .

More than half of the money spent by both national
and state committees goes for campaign orators. During
the next three months it is estimated that the Republican
national committee will have 3000 “spellbinders” traveling
out of the Chicago headquarters and 2500 who will report
to the New York office. . . .

The next largest item on the campaign bill is that for
printing. . . . Each of the national committees will spend
at least $500,000 in this way. Before the campaign is over
it is estimated that both the Republican and Democratic
committees will send out 100,000,000 separate docu-
ments. . . .

One more important branch of the work is the two
house-to-house canvasses of the voters. . . . Hundreds of
men are employed in each state, and the work of tabulat-
ing and classifying the results is by no means small. . . .
Some novel campaign methods will be adopted by
both the great parties during the campaign just opening.
The Republicans, it is stated, have decided to use phono-
graphs. . . . Some eloquent party man . . . will deliver a
speech before a phonographic record, from which any
desired number of copies may be made . . . and sent far
out into the rural districts, where it would be impossible
for the more popular and important orators to go. . . .

Democrats, on the other hand, will pin their faith to

stereopticons [an early slide projector].

Sources: (2) New York Tribune, October 12, 1888; (3) Wheeling Register, September 19,
1896; (5) Springfield Daily Republican, September 22, 1900.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  What did a presidential candidate need in the 1880s to

run an effective campaign? Two decades later, what had
changed, and what had not?

2.  Based on these documents, what developments both
inside and outside of politics seem to have inﬂuenced
changing campaign strategies?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Historians have traced the rise of an “imperial presidency”
in the late 1890s and early 1900s. How might new campaign
techniques have reﬂected, and perhaps contributed to, this
rise? To what extent was it a Republican invention?

Library of Congress.

641

