642

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

President  Benjamin  Harrison  also  sought  to  pro-
tect  black  voting  rights  in  the  South.  Warned  during
his  campaign  that  the  issue  was  politically  risky,
Harrison vowed that he would not “purchase the pres-
idency by a compact of silence upon this question.” He
found allies in Congress. Massachusetts representative
Henry Cabot Lodge drafted the Federal Elections Bill
of  1890,  or  Lodge  Bill,  proposing  that  whenever  one
hundred citizens in any district appealed for interven-
tion,  a  bipartisan  federal  board  could  investigate  and
seat the rightful winner.

Despite cries of outrage from southern Democrats,
who  warned  that  it  meant  “Negro  supremacy,”  the
House  passed  the  measure.  But  it  met  resistance  in
the Senate. Northern classical liberals, who wanted the
“best  men”  to  govern  through  professional  expertise,
thought  it  provided  too  much  democracy,  while
machine bosses feared the threat of federal interference
in the cities. Unexpectedly, many western Republicans
also opposed the bill — and with the entry of ten new
states since 1863, the West had gained enormous clout.
Senator William Stewart of Nevada, who had southern
family ties, claimed that federal oversight of elections
would  bring  “monarchy  or  revolution.”  He  and  his
allies killed the bill by a single vote.

The defeat was a devastating blow to those seeking
to defend black voting rights. In the verdict of one furi-
ous  Republican  leader  who  supported  Lodge’s  pro-
posal, the episode marked the demise of the party of
emancipation. “Think of it,” he fumed. “Nevada, barely
a respectable county, furnished two senators to betray
the Republican Party and the rights of citizenship.”

Other Republican initiatives also proved unpopu-
lar — at the polls as well as in Congress. In the Midwest,
swing  voters  reacted  against  local  Republican  cam-
paigns  to  prohibit  liquor  sales  and  end  state  funding
for Catholic schools. Blaming high consumer prices on
protective tariffs, other voters rejected Republican eco-
nomic  policies.  In  a  major  shift  in  the  1890  election,
Democrats  captured  the  House  of  Representatives.
Two years later, by the largest margin in twenty years,
voters  reelected  Democrat  Grover  Cleveland  to  the
presidency for a nonconsecutive second term. Repub-
lican congressmen abandoned any further attempt to
enforce fair elections in the South.

The Populist Program
As Democrats took power in Washington, they faced
rising pressure from rural voters in the South and West
who had organized the Farmers’ Alliance. Savvy politi-
cians responded quickly. Iowa Democrats, for example,

“Political Purity,” Puck, 1884

This Democratic cartoon suggests the disillusionment with
Republicans that emerged among many voters in the 1880s.
Here, the party chooses a dress, bustle, and plume to celebrate
Republicans’ achievements in prior decades: the Union war
record, Emancipation, and “high moral ideals.” Her undergar-
ments tell a different story: they are marked with scandals of
the Grant era (Chapter 15), while the economic interests of
tariff supporters (“protection”) are depicted as her corset. The
hats in the upper right corner show Republicans’ attempts to
appeal to various constituencies: temperance advocates and
German immigrants, workingmen and business leaders.
Whitelaw Reid, staunchly Republican editor of the New York
Tribune, appears as the party’s handmaiden. Puck, August 20,
1884.

power, energetic commissioners could serve as public
advocates,  exposing  unsafe  practices  and  generating
pressure for further laws.

Republican  Activism
In  1888,  after  a  decade  of
divided  government,  Republicans  gained  control  of
both Congress and the White House. They pursued an
ambitious agenda they believed would meet the needs
of a modernizing nation. In 1890, Congress extended
pensions to all Union veterans and yielded to growing
public outrage over trusts by passing a law to regulate
interstate  corporations.  Though  it  proved  difficult  to
enforce and was soon weakened by the Supreme Court,
the Sherman Antitrust Act (1890) was the first federal
attempt  to  forbid  any  “combination,  in  the  form  of
trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade.”

