CHAPTER 20

  Whose Government? Politics, Populists, and Progressives, 1880–1917

643

Riding to a Populist Rally,
Dickinson County, Kansas,
1890s

Farm families in wagons carry their
banners to a local meeting of the
People’s Party. Men, women, and
children often traveled together to
campaign events, which included not
only stump speeches but also picnics,
glee club music, and other family
entertainments. Kansas State Historical
Society.

took up some of the farmers’ demands, forestalling cre-
ation of a separate farmer-labor party in that state. But
other  politicians  listened  to  Alliance  pleas  and  did
nothing. It was a response they came to regret.

Republicans  utterly  dominated  Kansas,  a  state
chock-full of Union veterans and railroad boosters. But
politicians there treated the Kansas Farmers’ Alliance
with  contempt.  In  1890,  the  Kansas  Alliance  joined
with  the  Knights  of  Labor  to  create  a  People’s  Party.
They then stunned the nation by capturing four-fifths
of the lower house of the Kansas legislature and most of
the  state’s  congressional  seats.  The  victory  electrified
labor  and  agrarian  radicals  nationwide.  In  July  1892,
delegates from these groups met at Omaha, Nebraska,
and  formally  created  the  national  People’s  Party.

Nominating  former  Union  gen-
eral and Greenback-Labor leader
James B. Weaver for president, the
Populists, as they became known,
captured  a  million  votes
in
November and carried four west-
ern states (Map 20.2).

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
How did the political goals
of Populists differ in this
period from those of Dem-
ocrats and Republicans?

In  recognizing  an  “irrepressible  conflict  between
capital and labor,” Populists split from the mainstream
parties,  calling  for  stronger  government  to  protect
ordinary Americans. “We believe,” declared their Omaha
Platform  (1892),  “that  the  power  of  government — in
other  words,  of  the  people — should  be  expanded  as
rapidly  and  as  far  as  the  good  sense  of  an  intelligent
people and the teachings of experience shall justify, to

MAP 20.2
The Heyday of Western Populism, 1892

This map shows the percentage of the popular vote won
by James B. Weaver, the People’s Party candidate, in the
presidential election of 1892. Except in California and
Montana, the Populists won broad support across the
West and genuinely threatened the established parties
in that region.

C A N A D A

WASH.
23%

ORE.
44%

MONT.
8%

WYO.
47%

IDAHO
53%

NEVADA
64%

CALIF.
9%

PACIFIC
OCEAN

UTAH
TERR.

COLO.
55%

ARIZ.
TERR.

N. MEX.
TERR.

Populist party victory
Populist party wins
20–50% of popular vote
Populist party gains less
than 20% of vote
Territories ineligible to vote

N.DAK.
50%

S.DAK.
37%

NEBR.
45%

MINN.

WIS.

IOWA

ILL.

KAN.
50.03%

MO.

OKLA.
TERR.

ARK.

TEXAS
24%

MISS.

LA.

N

W

E

MEXICO

Gulf of
Mexico

S

