644

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

the end that oppression, injustice and poverty should
eventually cease.” Populists called for public ownership
of  railroad  and  telegraph  systems,  protection  of  land
from  monopoly  and  foreign  ownership,  a  federal
income tax on the rich, and a looser monetary policy to
help  borrowers.  Some  Populist  allies  went  further  to
make their point: in New Mexico, the Gorras Blancas,
a  vigilante  group  of  small-scale  Mexican  American
farmers,  protested  exploitative  railroads  and  “land
grabbers” by intimidating railroad workers and cutting
fences on large Anglo farms.

To see a longer excerpt of the Omaha Platform,
along with other primary sources from this period,
see Sources for America’s History.

Populist  leaders  represented  a  grassroots  uprising
of  ordinary  farmers,  and  some  won  colorful  nick-
names.  After  a  devastating  debate  triumph,  James  H.
Davis  of  Texas  became  known  as  “Cyclone.”  Mary  E.
Lease  was  derided  as  “Yellin’  Mary  Ellen”;  her  fellow
Kansan Jerry Simpson was called “Sockless Jerry” after
he ridiculed a wealthy opponent for wearing “fine silk
hosiery,” boasting that he himself wore no socks at all.
The  national  press,  based  in northeastern  cities,  ridi-
culed  such  “hayseed  politicians,”  but  farmers  insisted
on being taken seriously. In the run-up to one election,
a  Populist  writer  encouraged  party  members  to  sing
these lyrics to the tune of an old gospel hymn:

I once was a tool of oppression,
  As green as a sucker could be
And monopolies banded together
  To beat a poor hayseed like me. . . .

But now I’ve roused up a little,
  And their greed and corruption I see,
And the ticket we vote next November
  Will be made up of hayseeds like me.

Driven  by  farmers’  votes,  the  People’s  Party  had
mixed  success  in  attracting  other  constituencies.  Its
labor planks won support among Alabama steelworkers
and  Rocky  Mountain  miners,  but  not  among  many
other industrial workers, who stuck with the major par-
ties. Prohibitionist and women’s suffrage leaders attended
Populist conventions, hoping their issues would be taken
up, but they were disappointed. The legacies of the Civil
War  also  hampered  the  party.  Southern  Democrats
warned that Populists were really Radical Republicans in
disguise, while northeastern Republicans claimed the
southern “Pops” were ex-Confederates plotting another
round of treason. Amid these heated debates, the politi-
cal system suddenly confronted an economic crisis.

The Political Earthquakes
of the 1890s
In 1893, a severe economic depression hit the United
States. Though it was a global shock, and the agricul-
ture  sector  had  already  lagged  for  years,  Republicans
blamed Grover Cleveland, who had just reentered the
White House. “On every hand can be seen evidences of
Democratic  times,”  declared  one  Republican.  “The
deserted farm, the silent factory.”

Apparently  receptive  to  such  appeals,  voters  out-
side the South abandoned the Democrats in 1894 and
1896. Republicans, promising prosperity, gained con-
trol of the White House and both chambers of Congress
for  the  next  fifteen  years.  This  development  created
both  opportunities  and  challenges  for  progressive
reformers.  A  different  pattern  emerged  in  the  South:
Democrats  deployed  fraud,  violence,  and  race-based
appeals for white solidarity to defeat the Populist revolt.

Depression and Reaction
When Cleveland took the oath of office in March 1893,
hard times were prompting European investors to pull
money out of the United States; farm foreclosures and
railroad  bankruptcies  signaled  economic  trouble.  A
few weeks later, a Pennsylvania railroad went bankrupt,
followed  by  several  other  companies.  Investors  pan-
icked; the stock market crashed. By July, major banks
had drained their reserves and “suspended,” unable to
give  depositors  access  to  their  money.  By  year’s  end,
five hundred banks and thousands of other businesses
had  gone  under.  “Boston,”  one  man  remembered,
“grew suddenly old, haggard, and thin.” The unemploy-
ment rate in industrial cities soared above 20 percent.

For Americans who had lived through the terrible
1870s, conditions looked grimly familiar. Even fresher
in the public mind were recent labor uprisings, includ-
ing the 1886 Haymarket violence and the 1892 show-
down  at  Homestead — followed,  during  the  depres-
sion’s first year, by a massive Pennsylvania coal strike
and a Pullman railroad boycott that ended with bloody
clashes  between  angry  crowds  and  the  U.S.  Army.
Prosperous Americans, fearful of Populism, were even
more  terrified  that  workers  would  embrace  social-
ism or Marxism. Reminding Americans of upheavals
such  as  the  Paris  Commune  of  1871  and  its  bloody
aftermath,  conservative  commentators  of  the  1890s
launched America’s first “Red Scare” — a precursor to
similar episodes of hysteria in the 1920s (Chapter 22)
and 1950s (Chapter 25).

