CHAPTER 20

  Whose Government? Politics, Populists, and Progressives, 1880–1917

645

In  the  summer  of  1894,  a  further  protest  jolted
affluent Americans. Radical businessman Jacob Coxey
of  Ohio  proposed  that  the  U.S.  government  hire  the
unemployed to fix America’s roads. In 1894, he orga-
nized  hundreds  of  jobless  men — nicknamed  Coxey’s
Army — to march peacefully to Washington and appeal
for  the  program.  Though  public  employment  of  the
kind  Coxey  proposed  would  become  central  to  the
New Deal in the 1930s, many Americans in the 1890s
viewed Coxey as a dangerous extremist. Public alarm
grew when more protesters, inspired by Coxey, started
out from Los Angeles, Seattle, and other cities. As they
marched  east,  these  men  found  warm  support  and
offers  of  aid  in  Populist-leaning  cities  and  towns.  In
other places, police and property owners drove march-
ers away at gunpoint. Coxey was stunned by what hap-
pened when he reached Capitol Hill: he was jailed for
trespassing on the grass. Some of his men, arrested for
vagrancy, ended up in Maryland chain gangs. The rest
went home hungry.

As  this  response  suggested,  President  Grover
Cleveland’s administration was increasingly out of step
with rural and working-class demands. Any president
would have been hard-pressed to cope with the depres-
sion, but Cleveland made a particularly bad hash of it.
He  steadfastly  resisted  pressure  to  loosen  the  money
supply by expanding federal coinage to include silver
as  well  as  gold.  Advocates  of  this  free  silver  policy
(“free” because, under this plan, the U.S. Mint would
not charge a fee for minting silver coins) believed the
policy  would  encourage  borrowing  and  stimulate
industry.  But  Cleveland  clung  to  the  gold  standard;
however  dire  things  became,  he  believed,  the  money
supply must remain tied to the nation’s reserves of gold.
Even collapsing prices and a hemorrhage of gold to
Europe did not budge the president. With gold reserves
dwindling in 1895, he made a secret arrangement with
a syndicate of bankers led by John Pierpont Morgan to
arrange  gold  purchases  to  replenish  the  treasury.
Morgan  helped  maintain  America’s  gold  supply —
preserving  the  gold  standard — and  turned  a  tidy
profit  by  earning  interest  on  the  bonds  he  provided.
Cleveland’s  deal,  once  discovered,  enraged  fellow
Democrats.  South  Carolina  governor  Ben  Tillman
vowed to go to Washington and “poke old Grover with
a pitchfork,” earning the nickname “Pitchfork Ben.”

As the 1894 midterm elections loomed, Democratic
candidates tried to distance themselves from the presi-
dent. But on election day, large numbers of voters chose
Republicans,  who  promised  to  support  business,  put
down social unrest, and bring back prosperity. Western
voters turned many Populists out of office. In the next

congressional session, Republicans
controlled the House by a margin
of 245 to 105. The election began
sixteen  years  of  Republican
national dominance.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did different groups
of Americans react to the
economic depression of
the 1890s, and what hap-
pened as a result?

Democrats and the
“Solid South”
In the South, the only region where Democrats gained
strength in the 1890s, the People’s Party lost ground for
distinctive  reasons.  After  the  end  of  Reconstruction,
African  Americans  in  most  states  had  continued  to
vote  in  significant  numbers.  As  long  as  Democrats
competed for (and sometimes bought) black votes, the
possibility remained that other parties could win them
away. Populists proposed new measures to help farm-
ers  and  wage  earners — an  appealing  message  for
poverty-stricken  people  of  both  races.  Some  white
Populists  went  out  of  their  way  to  build  cross-racial
ties. “The accident of color can make no difference in
the interest of farmers, croppers, and laborers,” argued
Georgia Populist Tom Watson. “You are kept apart that
you may be separately fleeced of your earnings.”

Such appeals threatened the foundations of south-
ern politics. Democrats struck back, calling themselves
the “white man’s party” and denouncing Populists for
advocating “Negro rule.” From Georgia to Texas, many
poor white farmers, tenants, and wage earners ignored
such appeals and continued to support the Populists in
large numbers. Democrats found they could put down
the  Populist  threat  only  through  fraud  and  violence.
Afterward,  Pitchfork  Ben  Tillman  of  South  Carolina
openly bragged that he and other southern whites had
“done our level best” to block “every last” black vote.
“We  stuffed  ballot  boxes,”  he  said  in  1900.  “We  shot
them.  We  are  not  ashamed  of  it.”  “We  had  to  do  it,”
a  Georgia  Democrat  later  argued.  “Those  damned
Populists would have ruined the country.”

Having suppressed the political revolt, Democrats
looked  for  new  ways  to  enforce  white  supremacy.  In
1890,  a  constitutional  convention  in  Mississippi  had
adopted  a  key  innovation:  an  “understanding  clause”
that required would-be voters to interpret parts of the
state  constitution,  with  local  Democratic  officials
deciding  who  met  the  standard.  After  the  Populist
uprising,  such  measures  spread  to  other  southern
states. Louisiana’s grandfather clause, which denied the
ballot to any man whose grandfather had been unable
to  vote  in  slavery  days,  was  struck  down  by  the  U.S.
Supreme Court. But in Williams v. Mississippi (1898),
the Court allowed poll taxes and literacy tests to stand.

