646

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did politics change
in the South between the
1880s and the 1910s?

By 1908, every southern state had
adopted such measures.

The impact of disenfranchise-
ment  can  hardly  be  overstated
(Map  20.3).  Across  the  South,
from
turnout  plunged,
voter
above 70 percent to 34 percent or even lower. Not only
blacks but also many poor whites ceased to vote. Since
Democrats faced virtually no opposition, action shifted
to the “white primaries,” where Democratic candidates
competed  for  nominations.  Some  former  Populists
joined  the  Democrats  in  openly  advocating  white
supremacy.  The  racial  climate  hardened.  Segregation
laws  proliferated.  Lynchings  of  African  Americans
increasingly  occurred  in  broad  daylight,  with  crowds
of thousands gathered to watch.

The convict lease system, which had begun to take
hold  during  Reconstruction,  also  expanded.  Blacks
received harsh sentences for crimes such as “vagrancy,”
often when they were traveling to find work or if they
could not produce a current employment contract. By
the  1890s,  Alabama  depended  on  convict  leasing  for
6  percent  of  its  total  revenue.  Prisoners  were  over-
whelmingly  black:  a  1908  report  showed  that  almost
90 percent of Georgia’s leased convicts were black; out
of a white population of 1.4 million, only 322 were in
prison. Calling attention to the torture and deaths of
prisoners, as well as the damaging economic effect of
their  unpaid  labor,  reformers,  labor  unions,  and
Populists  protested  the  situation  strenuously.  But
“reforms”  simply  replaced  convict  leasing  with  the
chain gang, in which prisoners worked directly for the

NEBRASKA

IOWA

ILLINOIS

IND.

OHIO

COLORADO

KANSAS

MISSOURI

NEW
MEXICO

OKLAHOMA
1910

ARKANSAS

KENTUCKY

TENNESSEE

state on roadbuilding and other projects, under equally
cruel conditions. All these developments depended on
a political  Solid  South in which Democrats exercised
almost complete control.

The  impact  of  the  1890s  counterrevolution  was
dramatically  illustrated  in  Grimes  County,  a  cotton-
growing  area  in  east  Texas  where  blacks  comprised
more  than  half  of  the  population.  African  American
voters  kept  the  local  Republican  Party  going  after
Reconstruction  and  regularly  sent  black  representa-
tives to the Texas legislature. Many local white Populists
dismissed  Democrats’  taunts  of  “negro  supremacy,”
and a Populist-Republican coalition swept the county
elections in 1896 and 1898. But after their 1898 defeat,
Democrats in Grimes County organized a secret broth-
erhood  and  forcibly  prevented  blacks  from  voting  in
town  elections,  shooting  two  in  cold  blood.  The
Populist sheriff proved unable to bring the murderers
to  justice.  Reconstituted  in  1900  as  the  White  Man’s
Party, Democrats carried Grimes County by an over-
whelming  margin.  Gunmen  then  laid  siege  to  the
Populist sheriff ’s office, killed his brother and a friend,
and drove the wounded sheriff out of the county. The
White Man’s Party ruled Grimes County for the next
fifty years.

New National Realities
While  their  southern  racial  policies  were  abhorrent,
the  national  Democrats  simultaneously  amazed  the
country  in  1896  by  embracing  parts  of  the  Populists’
radical  farmer-labor  program.  They  nominated  for

PA.

N.J. MAP 20.3

MD. DEL.

Disenfranchisement in the New South

W.
VA.

VA.
1901–1902

N.C.
1900

S.C.
1895

ATLANTIC
OCEAN
N

W

FLA.

E

S

In the midst of the Populist challenge to
Democratic one-party rule in the South,
a movement to deprive blacks of the
right to vote spread from Miss issippi
across the South. By 1910, every state in
the region except Ten nessee, Arkansas,
Texas, and Florida had made consti-
tutional changes designed to prevent
blacks from voting, and these four states
accomplished much the same result
through poll taxes and other exclusion-
ary methods. For the next half century,
the political process in the South would
be for whites only.

MISS.
1890

ALA.
1901

GEORGIA
1908

TEXAS

LA.
1898

M E X I C O

Gulf of Mexico

Disenfranchisement by state
constitutional amendment
Disenfranchisement by
poll tax and other devices
Counties with black
population above 50%

0

0

150

300 miles

150

300 kilometers

