CHAPTER 20

  Whose Government? Politics, Populists, and Progressives, 1880–1917

647

Lynching in Texas

Lynchings peaked between 1890 and 1910; while most
common in the South, they occurred in almost every
state, from Oregon to Minnesota to New York. After
many lynchings — such as this one in the town of Center,
Texas, in 1920 — crowds posed to have their pictures
taken. Commercial photographers often, as in this case,
produced photographic postcards to sell as souvenirs.
What do we make of these gruesome rituals? Who is in
the crowd, and who is not? What do we learn from the
fact that this group of white men, some of whom may
have been responsible for the lynching, felt comfortable
having their photographs recorded with the body? The
victim in this photograph, a young man named Lige
Daniels, was seized from the local jail by a mob that
broke down the prison door to kidnap and kill him. The
inscription on the back of the postcard includes informa-
tion about the killing, along with the instructions “Give
this to Bud From Aunt Myrtle.” Private Collection.

president  a  young  Nebraska  congressman,  free-silver
advocate  William  Jennings  Bryan,  who  passionately
defended  farmers  and  attacked  the  gold  standard.
“Burn  down  your  cities  and  leave  our  farms,”  Bryan
declared in his famous convention speech, “and your
cities will spring up again as if by magic; but destroy
our farms and the grass will grow in the streets of every
city in the country.” He ended with a vow: “You shall
not crucify mankind on a cross of gold.” Cheering del-
egates endorsed a platform calling for free silver and a
federal income tax on the wealthy that would replace
tariffs as a source of revenue. Democrats, long defend-
ers of limited government, were moving toward a more
activist stance.

Populists,  reeling  from  recent  defeats,  endorsed
Bryan  in  the  campaign, but  their power  was  waning.
Populist  leader  Tom  Watson,  who  wanted  a  separate
program,  more  radical  than  Bryan’s,  observed  that
Democrats  in  1896  had  cast  the  Populists  as  “Jonah

while they play whale.” The People’s Party never recov-
ered  from  its  electoral  losses  in  1894  and  from
Democrats’ ruthless opposition in the South. By 1900,
rural  voters  pursued  reform  elsewhere,  particularly
through the new Bryan wing of the Democratic Party.
Meanwhile,  horrified  Republicans  denounced
Bryan’s  platform  as  anarchistic.  Their  nominee,  the
Ohio  congressman  and  tariff  advocate  William
McKinley,  chose  a  brilliant  campaign  manager,  Ohio
coal  and  shipping  magnate  Marcus  Hanna,  who
orchestrated an unprecedented corporate fund-raising
campaign. Under his guidance, the party backed away
from  moral  issues  such  as  prohibition  of  liquor  and
reached  out  to  new  immigrants. Though  the  popular
vote was closer, McKinley won big: 271 electoral votes
to Bryan’s 176 (Map 20.4).

Nationwide, as in the South, the realignment of the
1890s  prompted  new  measures  to  exclude  voters.
Influenced by classical liberals’ denunciations of “unfit

