CHAPTER 20

  Whose Government? Politics, Populists, and Progressives, 1880–1917

649

parties increasingly turned to the direct primary, ask-
ing  voters  (in  most  states,  registered  party  members)
rather than party leaders to choose nominees. Another
measure  that  enhanced  democratic  participation  was
the Seventeenth Amendment to the Constitution (1913),
requiring that U.S. senators be chosen not by state leg-
islatures, but by popular vote. Though many states had
adopted the practice well before 1913, southern states
had resisted, since Democrats feared that it might give
more power to their political opponents. After disen-
franchisement, such objections faded and the measure
passed. Thus disenfranchisement enhanced the power
of remaining voters in multiple, complicated ways.

At the same time, the Supreme Court proved hos-
tile to many proposed reforms. In 1895, for example, it
struck down a recently adopted federal income tax on
the wealthy. The Court ruled that unless this tax was
calculated  on  a  per-state  basis,  rather  than  by  the
wealth  of  individuals,  it  could  not  be  levied  without
a constitutional amendment. It took progressives nine-
teen years to achieve that goal.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What developments
caused the percentage
of Americans who voted
to plunge after 1900,
and what role did courts
play in antidemocratic
developments?

Labor  organizations  also  suf-
fered in the new political regime,
as federal courts invalidated many
regulatory laws passed to protect
workers.  As  early  as  1882,  in  the
case of In re Jacobs, the New York
State  Court  of  Appeals  struck
down  a  public-health  law  that
prohibited  cigar  manufacturing
in  tenements,  arguing  that  such
regulation  exceeded  the  state’s  police  powers.  In
Lochner v. New York (1905), the U.S. Supreme Court
told New York State it could not limit bakers’ workday
to  ten  hours  because  that  violated  bakers’  rights  to
make contracts. Judges found support for such rulings
in the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment,
which  prohibited  states  from  depriving  “any  person
of  life,  liberty,  or  property,  without  due  process  of
law.” Though the clause had been intended to protect
former slaves, courts used it to shield contract rights,
with judges arguing that they were protecting workers’

The U.S. Supreme Court, 1894

During the 1890s, the Supreme Court struck down a number of pieces of progressive legislation, including
a progressive federal income tax that had been signed into law by Congress and the president. In the Knight
Sugar Case (United States v. E. C. Knight Co.), the Court ruled that the federal government had limited
power over interstate commerce when a company did most of its manufacturing in a single state. In another
1894 decision, In re Debs, manufacturers were allowed free use of injunctions to shut down strikes. Two
years later, in Plessy v. Ferguson, the Court gave national sanction to racial segregation. In the front row,
from left to right, are justices Horace Gray, Stephen J. Field, Chief Justice Melville W. Fuller, John Marshall
Harlan I, and David J. Brewer. Standing in the back row, left to right, are justices Howell Jackson, Henry B.
Brown, George Shiras, and Edward Douglas White. C. M. Bell, Collection of the Supreme Court of the United States.

