650

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

freedom  from  government  regulation.  Interpreted  in
this  way,  the  Fourteenth  Amendment  was  a  major
obstacle to regulation of private business.

Farmer and labor advocates, along with urban pro-
gressives who called for more government regulation,
disagreed with such rulings. They believed judges, not
state legislators, were overreaching. While courts treated
employers and employees as equal parties, critics dis-
missed  this  as  a  legal  fiction.  “Modern  industry  has
reduced  ‘freedom  of  contract’  to  a  paper  privilege,”
declared one labor advocate, “a mere figure of rhetoric.”
Supreme Court justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., dis-
senting  in  the  Lochner  decision,  agreed.  If  the  choice
was between working and starving, he observed, how
could  bakers  “choose”  their  hours  of  work?  Holmes’s
view,  known  as  legal  realism,  eventually  won  judicial
favor,  but  only  after  years  of  progressive  and  labor
activism.

Reform Reshaped, 1901–1912
William McKinley, a powerful presence in the White
House, was no reformer. His victory was widely under-
stood  as  a  triumph  for  business  and  especially  for
industrial  titans  who  had  contributed  heavily  to  his
campaign. But the depression of the 1890s, by subject-
ing millions to severe hardship, had dramatically illus-
trated  the  problems  of  industrialization.  At  the  same
time, the success of McKinley’s campaign managers —
who  spent  more  than  $3.5  million,  versus  Bryan’s
$300,000 — raised  unsettling  questions  about  corpo-
rate power. Once the crisis of the 1890s passed, many
middle-class Americans proved ready to embrace pro-
gressive ideas. The rise of such ideas was aided by his-
torical  chance,  when  a  shocking  assassination  put  a
reformer in the White House.

Theodore Roosevelt as President
On September 14, 1901, only six months after William
McKinley  won  his  second  face-off  against  Democrat
William Jennings Bryan, the president was shot as he
attended  the  Pan-American  Exposition  in  Buffalo,
New York. He died eight days later. The murderer, Leon
Czolgosz, was influenced by anarchists who had carried
out recent assassinations in Europe. Though Czolgosz
was American-born, many feared that McKinley’s vio-
lent death was another warning of the threat posed by
radical  immigrants.  As  the  nation  mourned  its  third
murdered  president  in  less  than  four  decades,  Vice
President Theodore Roosevelt was sworn into office.

Roosevelt, from a prominent family, had chosen an
unconventional path. After graduating from Harvard,
he plunged into politics, winning a seat as a Republican
New  York  assemblyman.  Disillusioned  by  his  party’s
resistance to reform, he left politics in the mid-1880s
and  moved  to  a  North  Dakota  ranch.  But  his  cattle
herd  was  wiped  out  in  the  blizzards  of  1887.  He
returned  east,  winning  appointments  as  a  U.S.  Civil
Service  commissioner,  head  of  the  New  York  City
Police Commission, and McKinley’s assistant secretary
of  the  navy.  An  energetic  presence  in  all  these  jobs,
Roosevelt  gained  broad  knowledge  of  the  problems
America  faced  at  the  municipal,  state,  and  federal
levels.

After  serving  in  the  War  of  1898  (Chapter  21),
Roosevelt was elected as New York’s governor. In this
job, he pushed through civil service reform and a tax
on corporations. Seeking to neutralize this progressive
and  rather  unpredictable  political  star,  Republican
bosses chose Roosevelt as McKinley’s running mate in
1900, hoping the vice-presidency would be a political
dead  end.  Instead,  they  suddenly  found  Roosevelt  in
the  White  House.  The  new  president,  who  called  for
vigorous  reform,  represented  a  major  shift  for  the
Republicans.

Antitrust  Legislation  Roosevelt  blended  reform
with the needs of private enterprise, but on occasion he
challenged corporations in new ways. During a bitter
1902 coal strike, for example, he threatened to nation-
alize the big coal companies if their owners refused to
negotiate  with  the  miners’  union.  The  owners  hastily
came to the table. Roosevelt also sought better enforce-
ment  of  the  Interstate  Commerce  Act  and  Sherman
Antitrust  Act.  He  pushed  through  the  Elkins  Act
(1903), which prohibited discriminatory railway rates
that  favored  powerful  customers.  That  same  year,  he
created  the  Bureau  of  Corporations,  empowered  to
investigate  business  practices  and  bolster  the  Justice
Department’s  capacity  to  mount  antitrust  suits.  The
department  had  already  filed  such  a  suit  against  the
Northern Securities Company, arguing that this com-
bination  of  northwestern  railroads  had  created  a
monopoly in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act.
In  a  landmark  decision  in  1904,  the  Supreme  Court
ordered Northern Securities dissolved.

That year, calling for every American to get what he
called  a  Square  Deal,  Roosevelt  handily  defeated
Democratic candidate Alton B. Parker. Now president
in  his  own  right,  Roosevelt  stepped  up  his  attack  on
trusts. He regarded large-scale enterprise as the natu-
ral  tendency  of  modern  industry,  but  he  hoped  to

