CHAPTER 20

  Whose Government? Politics, Populists, and Progressives, 1880–1917

651

to his successor, William Howard
Taft.  In  its  Standard  Oil  decision
(1911), the Supreme Court agreed
with  Taft’s  Justice  Department
that John D. Rockefeller’s massive
oil  monopoly  should  be  broken
up into several competing compa-
nies.  After  this  ruling,  Taft’s  attorney  general  under-
took antitrust actions against other giant companies.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
To what degree, and
in what ways, were
Roosevelt’s policies
progressive?

Environmental  Conservation  Roosevelt  was  an
ardent outdoorsman and hunter. It was after the presi-
dent went bear hunting in Mississippi in 1902, in fact,
that a Russian Jewish immigrant couple in New York
began to sell stuffed “Teddy’s bears,” which became an
American  childhood  tradition.  After  John  Muir  gave
Roosevelt  a  tour  of  Yosemite  Valley,  the  president
described the transcendent experience of camping in
the  open  air  under  the  giant  sequoias.  “The  majestic
trunks, beautiful in color and in symmetry,” he wrote,
“rose round us like the pillars of a mightier cathedral
than ever was conceived.”

Roosevelt  translated  his  love  of  nature  into  envi-
ronmental action. By the end of his presidency, he had
issued fifty-one executive orders creating wildlife ref-
uges and signed a number of bills advocated by envi-
ronmentalists.  He  also  oversaw  creation  of  three
national  parks,  including  Colorado’s  Mesa  Verde,  the
first  to  “protect  the  works  of  man”:  American  Indian
archaeological sites. Also notable was his vigorous use
of  the  Antiquities  Act,  through  which  he  set  aside
such  beautiful  sites  as  Arizona’s  Grand  Canyon  and
Washington’s Mt. Olympus.

Some  of  Roosevelt’s  conservation  policies,  how-
ever, had a probusiness bent. He increased the amount
of land held in federal forest reserves and turned their
management over to the new, independent U.S. Forest
Service, created in 1905. But his forestry chief, Gifford
Pinchot, insisted on fire suppression to maximize log-
ging  potential.  In  addition,  Roosevelt  lent  support  to
the Newlands Reclamation Act (1902), which had much
in  common  with  earlier  Republican  policies  to  pro-
mote  economic  development  in  the  West.  Under  the
act, the federal government sold public lands to raise
money  for  irrigation  projects  that  expanded  agricul-
ture on arid lands. The law, interestingly, fulfilled one
of  the  demands  of  the  unemployed  men  who  had
marched with Coxey’s Army.

Roosevelt’s Legacies  Like the environmental laws
enacted  during  his  presidency,  Theodore  Roosevelt
was  full  of  contradictions.  An  unabashed  believer  in

Reining in Big Business

This 1904 cartoon from Puck shows Theodore Roosevelt as
a tiny ﬁgure with a sword marked “public service,” taking on
railroad developer Jay Gould, ﬁnancier John Pierpont Morgan,
and other Wall Street titans. The ﬁgure at the top right is oil
magnate John D. Rockefeller. In its reference to the folktale
“Jack the Giant Killer,” the cartoon suggests how difﬁcult it
will be for the president to limit the power of globally con-
nected bankers and ﬁnanciers. Library of Congress.

identify and punish “malefactors of great wealth” who
abused their power. After much wrangling in Congress,
Roosevelt won a major victory with the passage of the
Hepburn  Act  (1906),  which  enabled  the  Interstate
Commerce Commission to set shipping rates.

At  the  time  Roosevelt  acted,  trusts  had  partially
protected  themselves  with  the  help  of  two  friendly
states,  New  Jersey  and  Delaware,  whose  legislatures
had loosened regulations and invited trusts to incorpo-
rate  under  their  new  state  laws.  With  its  Northern
Securities  ruling,  however,  the  Supreme  Court  began
to  recognize  federal  authority  to  dissolve  the  most
egregious monopolies. Roosevelt left a powerful legacy

