652

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

what  he  called  “Anglo-Saxon”  superiority,  Roosevelt
nonetheless incurred the wrath of white supremacists
by inviting Booker T. Washington to dine at the White
House.  Roosevelt  called  for  elite  “best  men”  to  enter
politics, but he also defended the dignity of labor.

In 1908, Roosevelt chose to retire, bequeathing the
Republican  nomination  to  talented  administrator
William  Howard  Taft.  Taft  portrayed  himself  as
Roosevelt’s man, though he maintained a closer rela-
tionship than his predecessor with probusiness Repub-
licans  in  Congress.  In  1908,  Taft  faced  off  against
Demo crat  William  Jennings  Bryan,  who,  eloquent  as
ever, attacked Republicans as the party of “plutocrats”:
men who used their wealth to buy political influence.
Bryan outdid Taft in urging tougher antitrust and pro-
labor legislation, but Taft won comfortably.

In the wake of Taft’s  victory, however, rising pres-
sure  for  reform  began  to  divide  Republicans.  Con-
servatives  dug  in,  while  militant  progressives  within
the party thought Roosevelt and his successor had not
gone far enough. Reconciling these conflicting forces
was  a  daunting  task.  For  Taft,  it  spelled  disaster.
Through  various  incidents,  he  found  himself  on  the
opposite side of progressive Republicans, who began to
call themselves “Insurgents” and to plot their own path.

Diverse Progressive Goals
The  revolt  of  Republican  Insurgents  signaled  the
strength  of  grassroots  demands  for  change.  No  one
described these emerging goals more eloquently than
Jane  Addams,  who  famously  declared  in  Democracy
and  Social  Ethics  (1902),  “The  cure  for  the  ills  of
Democracy  is  more  Democracy.”  It  was  a  poignant
statement,  given  the  sharply  antidemocratic  direc-
tion  American  politics  had  taken  since  the  1890s.
What, now, should more democracy look like? Various
groups of progressives — women, antipoverty reform-
ers,  African  American  advocates — often  disagreed
about priorities and goals. Some, frustrated by events
in the United States, traveled abroad to study inspiring
experiments  in  other  nations,  hoping  to  bring  ideas
home (America Compared, p. 653).

States also served as seedbeds of change. Theodore
Roosevelt dubbed Wisconsin a “laboratory of democ-
racy” under energetic Republican governor Robert La
Follette  (1901–1905).  La  Follette  promoted  what  he
called the Wisconsin Idea — greater government inter-
vention  in  the  economy,  with  reliance  on  experts,
particularly progressive economists, for policy recom-
mendations. Like Addams, La Follette combined respect
for expertise with commitment to “more Democracy.”

He won battles to restrict lobbying and to give Wiscon-
sin  citizens  the  right  of  recall — voting  to  remove
unpopular politicians from office — and referendum —
voting directly on a proposed law, rather than leaving
it in the hands of legislators. Continuing his career in
the U.S. Senate, La Follette, like Roosevelt, advocated
increasingly  aggressive  measures  to  protect  workers
and rein in corporate power.

Protecting  the  Poor  The  urban  settlement  move-
ment called attention to poverty in America’s industrial
cities. In the emerging social sciences, experts argued
that  unemployment  and  crowded  slums  were  not
caused  by  laziness  and  ignorance,  as  elite  Americans
had long believed. Instead, as journalist Robert Hunter
wrote  in  his  landmark  study,  Poverty  (1904),  such
problems  resulted  from  “miserable  and  unjust  social
conditions.”  Charity  work  was  at  best  a  limited  solu-
tion. “How vain to waste our energies on single cases of
relief,”  declared  one  reformer,  “when  society  should
aim at removing the prolific sources of all the woe.”

By  the  early  twentieth  century,  reformers  placed
particular  emphasis  on  labor  conditions  for  women
and  children.  The  National  Child  Labor  Committee,
created  in  1907,  hired  photographer  Lewis  Hine  to
record  brutal  conditions  in  mines  and  mills  where
children  worked.  (See  Hine’s  photograph  on  p.  621.)
Impressed by the committee’s investigations, Theodore
Roosevelt sponsored the first White House Conference
on  Dependent  Children  in  1909,  bringing  national
attention to child welfare issues. In 1912, momentum
from  the  conference  resulted  in  creation  of  the
Children’s Bureau in the U.S. Labor Department.

Those  seeking  to  protect  working-class  women
scored  a  major  triumph  in  1908  with  the  Supreme
Court’s decision in Muller v. Oregon, which upheld an
Oregon  law  limiting  women’s  workday  to  ten  hours.
Given the Court’s ruling three years earlier in Lochner
v. New York, it was a stunning victory. To win the case,
the  National  Consumers’  League  (NCL)  recruited
Louis Brandeis, a son of Jewish immigrants who was
widely known as “the people’s lawyer” for his eagerness
to take on vested interests. Brandeis’s legal brief in the
Muller  case  devoted  only  two  pages  to  the  constitu-
tional  issue  of  state  police  powers.  Instead,  Brandeis
rested  his  arguments  on  data  gathered  by  the  NCL
describing the toll that long work hours took on wom-
en’s health. The “Brandeis brief ” cleared the way for use
of social science research in court decisions. Sanction-
ing  a  more  expansive  role  for  state  governments,  the
Muller decision encouraged women’s organizations to
lobby for further reforms. Their achievements included

