CHAPTER 20

  Whose Government? Politics, Populists, and Progressives, 1880–1917

655

and military service. These principles, based on African
American pride and an uncompromising demand for
full equality, guided the civil rights movement through-
out the twentieth century.

In 1908, a bloody race riot broke out in Springfield,
Illinois.  Appalled  by  the  white  mob’s  violence  in  the
hometown of Abraham Lincoln, New York settlement
worker Mary White Ovington called together a group
of  sympathetic  progressives  to  formulate  a  response.
Their meeting led in 1909 to creation of the National
Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Colored  People
(NAACP). Most leaders of the Niagara Movement soon
joined; W. E. B. Du Bois became editor of the NAACP
journal, The Crisis. The fledgling group found allies in
many African American women’s clubs and churches.
It  also  cooperated  with  the  National  Urban  League
(1911), a union of agencies that assisted black migrants
in the North. Over the coming decades, these groups
grew into a powerful force for racial justice.

The Problem of Labor  Leaders of the nation’s dom-
inant union, the American Federation of Labor, were
slow to ally with progressives. They had long believed
workers should improve their situation through strikes
and  direct  negotiation  with  employers,  not  through
politics.  But  by  the  1910s,  as  progressive  reformers
came forward with solutions, labor leaders in state after
state began to join the cause.

The nation also confronted a daring wave of radical
labor  militancy.  In  1905,  the  Western  Federation  of
Miners  (WFM),  led  by  fiery  leaders  such  as  William
“Big  Bill”  Haywood,  helped  create  a  new  movement,
the  Industrial  Workers  of  the  World  (IWW).  The
Wobblies, as they were called, fervently supported the
Marxist  class  struggle.  As  syndicalists,  they  believed
that  by  resisting  in  the  workplace  and  ultimately
launching  a  general  strike,  workers  could  overthrow
capitalism. A new society would emerge, run directly
by workers. At  its height, around 1916, the IWW had
about  100,000  members.  Though  divided  by  internal
conflicts,  the  group  helped  spark  a  number  of  local
protests  during  the  1910s,  including  strikes  of  rail
car  builders  in  Pennsylvania,  textile  operatives  in
Massachusetts, rubber workers in
Ohio, and miners in Minnesota.

Meanwhile,  after  midnight
on  October  1,  1910,  an  explo-
sion  ripped  through  the  Los
Angeles  Times  headquarters,  kill-
ing twenty employees and wreck-
ing the building. It turned out that
John J. McNamara, a high official

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did various grassroots
reformers deﬁne “progres-
sivism,” and how did their
views differ from Theo-
dore Roosevelt’s version
of “progressivism”?

W. E. B. Du Bois

W. E. B. Du Bois was born in western Massachusetts in 1868,
the son of a barber and a domestic worker. He received an
excellent local education and went on to earn his BA and PhD
at Harvard, as well as to study with cutting-edge social scien-
tists in Germany. By 1900, Du Bois had become a national civil
rights leader and America’s leading black intellectual. Famous
for his sociological and historical studies, including The Souls
of Black Folk (1903), Du Bois helped found the National
Associa tion for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)
and edited the organization’s journal, The Crisis. Between
1900 and 1945, he helped organize Pan-African conferences
in locations around the world. Toward the end of his life, Du
Bois pursued this Pan-African ideal by moving to Ghana, the
ﬁrst modern African nation formed after the end of European
colonialism. He died there in 1963. Special Collections and
Archives, W. E. B. Du Bois Library, University of Massachusetts Amherst.

for a talented tenth of educated blacks to develop new
strategies.  “The  policy  of  compromise  has  failed,”
declared William Monroe Trotter, pugnacious editor of
the  Boston  Guardian.  “The  policy  of  resistance  and
aggression deserves a trial.”

In  1905,  Du  Bois  and  Trotter  called  a  meeting  at
Niagara Falls — on the Canadian side, because no hotel
on  the  U.S.  side  would  admit  blacks.  The  resulting
Niagara Principles called for full voting rights; an end
to  segregation;  equal  treatment  in  the  justice  system;
and equal opportunity in education, jobs, health care,

