656

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

The Ludlow Massacre, 1914

Like his drawings of Triangle Shirtwaist
ﬁre victims in New York, this cover illus-
tration for the popular socialist magazine
The Masses demonstrates John Sloan’s
outrage at social injustice in progressive
America. The drawing memorializes a
tragic episode during a coal miners’
strike at Ludlow, Colorado — the
asphyxiation of women and children
when vigilantes torched the tent city
of evicted miners — and the aftermath,
an armed revolt by enraged miners.
The Masses, June 1914.

of  the  American  Federation  of  Labor’s  Bridge  and
Structural
Iron  Workers  Union,  had  planned
the  bombing  against  the  fiercely  antiunion  Times.
McNamara’s brother and another union member had
carried  out  the  attack.  The  bombing  created  a  sensa-
tion, as did the terrible Triangle Shirtwaist fire (Chap-
ter  19)  and  the  IWW’s  high-profile  strikes.  What
should be done? As the election of 1912 approached,
labor issues moved high on the nation’s agenda.

The Election of 1912
Retirement  did  not  sit  comfortably  with  Theodore
Roosevelt. Returning from a yearlong safari in Africa
in 1910 and finding Taft wrangling with the Insurgents,
Roosevelt itched to jump in. In a speech in Osawatomie,
Kansas, in August 1910, he called for a New National-
ism. In modern America, he argued, private property
had  to  be  controlled  “to  whatever  degree  the  public

welfare  may  require  it.”  He  proposed  a  federal  child
labor  law,  more  recognition  of  labor  rights,  and  a
national minimum wage for women. Pressed by friends
like  Jane  Addams,  Roosevelt  also  endorsed  women’s
suffrage. Most radical was his attack on the legal sys-
tem.  Insisting  that  courts  blocked  reform,  Roosevelt
proposed  sharp  curbs  on  their  powers  (American
Voices, p. 658).

Early  in  1912,  Roosevelt  announced  himself  as  a
Republican candidate for president. A battle within the
party  ensued.  Roosevelt  won  most  states  that  held
primary  elections,  but  Taft  controlled  party  caucuses
elsewhere.  Dominated  by  regulars,  the  Republican
convention chose Taft. Roosevelt then led his followers
into  what  became  known  as  the  Progressive  Party,
offering  his  New  Nationalism  directly  to  the  people.
Though Jane Addams harbored private doubts (espe-
cially about Roosevelt’s mania for battleships), she sec-
onded  his  nomination,  calling  the  Progressive  Party

