CHAPTER 20

  Whose Government? Politics, Populists, and Progressives, 1880–1917

657

The Republicans Resist Roosevelt,
August 7, 1912

This cartoon appeared in the political
humor journal Puck, six weeks after the
Republican convention nominated Taft
and two days after the new Progressive
Party nominated Theodore Roosevelt.
The baptismal choir consists of men such
as Gifford Pinchot, who helped Roosevelt
form the new party. The G.O.P. elephant
refuses to be baptized in “Teddyism,”
though Preacher Roosevelt insists,
“Salvation is Free.” President William
Howard Taft, dressed in brown with a
hat, pulls on the elephant’s tail. Library
of Congress.

“the  Ameri can  exponent  of  a  world-wide  movement
for  juster  social  conditions.”  In  a  nod  to  Roosevelt’s
combative  stance,  party  followers  called  themselves
“Bull Mooses.”

Roosevelt was not the only rebel on the ballot: the
major parties also faced a challenge from charismatic
socialist  Eugene  V.  Debs.  In  the  1890s,  Debs  had
founded the American Railway Union (ARU), a broad-
based  group  that  included  both  skilled  and  unskilled
workers.  In  1894,  amid  the  upheavals  of  depression
and  popular  protest,  the  ARU  had  boycotted  luxury
Pullman sleeping cars, in support of a strike by workers
at the Pullman Company. Railroad managers, claiming
the strike obstructed the U.S. mail, persuaded Grover
Cleveland’s  administration  to  intervene  against  the
union. The strike failed, and Debs served time in prison
along with other ARU leaders. The experience radical-
ized him, and in 1901 he launched the Socialist Party of
America. Debs translated socialism into an American
idiom, emphasizing the democratic process as a means
to defeat capitalism. By the early 1910s, his party had
secured a minor but persistent role in politics. Both the
Progressive  and  Socialist  parties  drew  strength  from
the West, a region with vigorous urban reform move-
ments and a legacy of farmer-labor activism.

Watching the rise of the Progressives and Socialists,
Democrats were keen to build on dramatic gains they
had made in the 1910 midterm election. Among their
younger leaders was Virginia-born Woodrow Wilson,
who as New Jersey’s governor had compiled an impres-
sive  reform  record,  including  passage  of  a  direct  pri-
mary, workers’ compensation, and utility regulation. In

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
Why did the election of
1912 feature four candi-
dates, and how did their
platforms differ?

1912,  he  won  the  Democrats’
nomination. Wilson possessed, to
a  fault,  the  moral  certainty  that
characterized many elite progres-
sives.  He  had  much  in  common
with  Roosevelt.  “The old  time  of
individual  competition  is  proba-
bly  gone  by,”  he  admitted,  agreeing  for  more  federal
measures  to  restrict  big  business.  But  his  goals  were
less sweeping than Roosevelt’s, and only gradually did
he hammer out a reform program, calling it the New
Freedom.  “If  America  is  not  to  have  free  enterprise,”
Wilson warned, “then she can have freedom of no sort
whatever.”  He  claimed  Roosevelt’s  program  repre-
sented collectivism, whereas the New Freedom would
preserve political and economic liberty.

With four candidates in the field — Taft, Roosevelt,
Wilson,  and  Debs — the  1912  campaign  generated
intense  excitement.  Democrats  continued  to  have  an
enormous  blind  spot:  their  opposition  to  African
American  rights.  But  Republicans,  despite  plentiful
opportunities,  had  also  conspicuously  failed  to  end
segregation or pass antilynching laws. Though African
American leaders had high hopes for the Progressive
Party, they were crushed when the new party refused to
seat southern black delegates or take a stand for racial
equality. W. E. B. Du Bois considered voting for Debs,
calling the Socialists the only party “which openly rec-
ognized Negro manhood.” But he ultimately endorsed
Wilson.  Across  the  North,  in  a  startling  shift,  thou-
sands  of  African  American  men  and  women  worked
and  voted  for  Wilson,  hoping  Democrats’  reform

