liberty has always been, and must always be, to take from
some one man or class of men the right to enjoy power,
or wealth, or position, or immunity, which has not been
earned by service to his or their fellows. That is what you
fought for in the Civil War, and that is what we strive
for now.

. . . Practical equality of opportunity for all citizens,

when we achieve it, will have two great results. First,
every man will have a fair chance to make of himself all
that in him lies; to reach the highest point to which his
capacities, unassisted by special privilege of his own and
unhampered by the special privilege of others, can carry
him, and to get for himself and his family substantially
what he has earned. Second, equality of opportunity
means that the commonwealth will get from every
citizen the highest service of which he is capable.

. . . When I say that I am for the square deal, I mean

not merely that I stand for fair play under the present
rules of the game, but that I stand for having those rules
changed so as to work for a more substantial equality of
opportunity and of reward for equally good service. . . .
This means that our government, national and State, must
be freed from the sinister influence or control of special
interests. Exactly as the special interests of cotton and
slavery threatened our political integrity before the Civil
War, so now the great special business interests too often
control and corrupt the men and methods of government
for their own profit. We must drive the special interests
out of politics. . . .

The Constitution guarantees protections to property,
and we must make that promise good. But it does not give
the right of suffrage to any corporation. The true friend of
property, the true conservative, is he who insists that
property shall be the servant and not the master of the
commonwealth. . . . The citizens of the United States must
effectively control the mighty commercial forces which
they have themselves called into being.

There can be no effective control of corporations while

their political activity remains. To put an end to it will be
neither a short nor an easy task, but it can be done. . . .

We are face to face with new conceptions of the rela-

tions of property to human welfare, chiefly because
certain advocates of the rights of property as against the

rights of men have been pushing their claims too far. The
man who wrongly holds that every human right is sec-
ondary to his profit must now give way to the advocate
of human welfare. . . .

No man can be a good citizen unless he has a wage
more than sufficient to cover the bare cost of living, and
hours of labor short enough so that after his day’s work is
done he will have time and energy to bear his share in the
management of the community. . . . We keep countless
men from being good citizens by the conditions of life
with which we surround them. We need comprehensive
workmen’s compensation acts [and] laws to regulate child
labor and work for women. . . .

The New Nationalism puts the national need before

sectional or personal advantage. It is impatient of the
utter confusion that results from local legislatures
attempting to treat national issues as local issues, [and]
the impotence which makes it possible for local selfish-
ness or for legal cunning, hired by wealthy special
interests, to bring national activities to a deadlock. This
New Nationalism regards the executive power as the
steward of the public welfare. It demands of the judiciary
that it shall be interested primarily in human welfare
rather than in property. . . .

The object of government is the welfare of the people.
The material progress and prosperity of a nation are desir-
able chiefly so far as they lead to the moral and material
welfare of all good citizens.

Sources: Article from Review of Reviews, January 1897; speech from theodore-roosevelt
.com/trspeeches.html.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  In what ways did Roosevelt’s views change between

1897 and 1910? What factors might have contributed
to the change? Can you identify aspects of Roosevelt’s
thinking that remained the same?

2.  How might the jobs Roosevelt held or sought, in 1897

and in 1910, have inﬂuenced his ideas?

3.  If you were asked, after reading these documents, what

Roosevelt stood for, how would you respond?

659

