660

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

energy  would  benefit  Americans  across  racial  lines.
The change helped lay the foundations for Democrats’
New Deal coalition of the 1930s.

Despite  the  intense  campaign,  Republicans’  divi-
sion between Taft and Roosevelt made the result fairly
easy to predict. Wilson won, though he received only
42  percent  of  the  popular  vote  and  almost  certainly
would have lost if Roosevelt had not been in the race
(Map 20.5). In comparison with Roosevelt and Debs,
Wilson appeared to be a rather old-fashioned choice.
But with labor protests cresting and progressives gain-
ing support, Wilson faced intense pressure to act.

Wilson and the New Freedom,
1913–1917
In  his  inaugural  address,  Wilson  acknowledged  that
industrialization  had  precipitated  a  crisis.  “There  can
be  no  equality  of  opportunity,”  he  said,  “if  men  and
women and children be not shielded . . . from the con-
sequences  of  great  industrial  and  social  processes
which they cannot alter, control, or singly cope with.”
Wilson  was  a  Democrat,  and  labor  interests  and
farmers — some previously radicalized in the People’s

Party — were important components of his base. In the
South, many of those voters also upheld strong support
for white supremacy. Despite many northern African
Americans’ support for Wilson, his administration did
little  for  those  constituents.  But  he  undertook  bold
economic reforms.

Economic Reforms
In an era of rising corporate power, many Democrats
believed workers needed stronger government to inter-
vene  on  their  behalf,  and  they  began  to  transform
themselves  into  a  modern,  state-building  party.  The
Wilson  administration  achieved  a  series  of  landmark
measures — at  least  as  significant  as  those  enacted
during  earlier  administrations,  and  perhaps  more  so
(Table 20.1). The most enduring was the federal pro-
gressive  income  tax.  “Progressive,”  by  this  definition,
referred to the fact that it was not a flat tax but rose pro-
gressively toward the top of the income scale. The tax,
passed in the 1890s but rejected by the Supreme Court,
was  reenacted  as  the  Sixteenth  Amendment  to  the
Constitution,  ratified  by  the  states  in  February  1913.
The next year, Congress used the new power to enact
an  income  tax  of  1  to  7  percent  on  Americans  with
annual incomes of $4,000 or more. At a time when white

7

5

4

3

4

3

4

11

2

3

6

3

5

5

8

12

13

13

15

29 15

24

10

18

10

20

9

10

13

12

10 12

14

45

38

8

12

12

9

6

6

44

18

5
7
14
3
8

MAP 20.5
The Presidential Election of 1912

The 1912 election reveals why the two-
party system is so strongly rooted in
American politics — especially in presidential
elections. The Democrats, though a minority
party, won an electoral landslide because
the Republicans divided their vote between
Roosevelt and Taft. This result indicates what
is at stake when major parties splinter. The
Socialist Party candidate, Eugene V. Debs,
despite a record vote of 900,000, received no
electoral votes.

Candidate

Woodrow Wilson
(Democrat)

Electoral
Vote

Popular
Vote

Percent of
Popular Vote

435

6,296,547

41.9

Theodore Roosevelt
(Progressive)

88

4,118,571

William H. Taft
(Republican)

Eugene V. Debs
(Socialist)

Other minor parties

8

0

3,486,720

900,672

27.4

23.2

6.0

1.5

