CHAPTER 20

  Whose Government? Politics, Populists, and Progressives, 1880–1917

661

“The Finishing Touch,” November 2, 1912

Three days before the election, Harper’s Weekly, which endorsed Woodrow Wilson, suggested in
this cartoon some of the reasons why he would win. Roosevelt supported protective tariffs, while
Wilson called for tariff reform; Democrats also claimed that Roosevelt’s antitrust proposals were not
sufﬁciently aggressive and that in 1904 he had taken a large campaign contribution from Standard
Oil. Such controversies showed the nation’s accelerating momentum for reform. The man in the
middle is Wilson’s campaign manager, William McAdoo. Harper’s Weekly, November 2, 1912, p. 26.

male wageworkers might expect to make $800 per year,
the tax affected less than 5 percent of households.

Three  years  later,  Congress  followed  this  with  an
inheritance  tax.  These  measures  created  an  entirely
new  way  to  fund  the  federal  government,  replacing
Republicans’ high tariff as the chief source of revenue.
Over subsequent decades, especially between the 1930s
and the 1970s, the income tax system markedly reduced
America’s extremes of wealth and poverty.

Wilson  also  reorganized  the  financial  system  to
address the absence of a central bank. At the time, the
main function of national central banks was to back
up  commercial  banks  in  case  they  could  not  meet
their obligations. In the United States, the great private
banks  of  New  York  (such  as  J.  P.  Morgan’s)  assumed
this  role;  if  they  weakened,  the  entire  system  could
collapse. This had nearly happened in 1907, when the
Knickerbocker Trust Company failed, precipitating a
panic. The Federal Reserve Act (1913) gave the nation

a  banking  system  more  resistant  to  such  crises.  It
created  twelve  district  reserve  banks  funded  and
controlled by their member banks, with a central Fed-
eral Reserve Board to impose regulation. The Federal
Reserve  could  issue  currency — paper  money  based
on assets held in the system — and set the interest rate
that district reserve banks charged
to their members. It thereby reg-
ulated  the  flow  of  credit  to  the
general  public. The  act  strength-
ened the banking system and, to a
modest degree, discouraged risky
speculation on Wall Street.

Wilson  and  the  Democratic
Congress  turned  next  to  the
trusts. In doing so, Wilson relied
heavily  on  Louis  D.  Brandeis,  the  celebrated  people’s
lawyer.  Brandeis  denied  that  monopolies  were  effi-
cient. On the contrary, he believed the best source of

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
To what degree did
reforms of the Wilson era
fulﬁll goals that various
agrarian-labor advocates
and progressives had
sought?

