CHAPTER 20

  Whose Government? Politics, Populists, and Progressives, 1880–1917

663

appointed near the end of Taft’s presidency and charged
with investigating the conditions of labor. In its 1913
report,  the  commission  summed  up  the  impact  of
industrialization on low-skilled workers. Many earned
$10  or  less  a  week  and  endured  regular  episodes  of
unemployment;  some  faced  long-term  poverty  and
hardship.  Workers  held  “an  almost  universal  convic-
tion” that they were “denied justice.” The commission
concluded that a major cause of industrial violence was
the ruthless antiunionism of American employers. In
its key recommendation, the report called for federal
laws protecting workers’ right to organize and engage
in  collective  bargaining.  Though  such  laws  were,  in
1915,  too  radical  to  win  passage,  the  commission
helped set a new national agenda that would come to
fruition in the 1930s.

Guided by the commission’s revelations, President
Wilson warmed up to labor. In 1915 and 1916, he cham-
pioned  a  host  of  bills  to  benefit  American  workers.
They included the Adamson Act, which established an
eight-hour day for railroad workers; the Seamen’s Act,
which  eliminated  age-old  abuses  of  merchant  sailors;
and a workmen’s compensation law for federal employ-
ees. Wilson, despite initial modest goals, presided over
a  major  expansion  of  federal  authority,  perhaps  the
most significant since Reconstruction. The continued
growth  of  U.S.  government  offices  during  Wilson’s
term  reflected  a  reality  that  transcended  party  lines:
corporations had grown in size and power, and Ameri-
cans increasingly wanted federal authority to grow, too.
Wilson’s  reforms  did  not  extend  to  the  African
Americans who had supported him in 1912. In fact, the
president rolled back certain Republican policies, such
as selected appointments of black postmasters. “I tried
to help elect Wilson,” W. E. B. Du Bois reflected gloom-
ily, but “under Wilson came the worst attempt at Jim
Crow  legislation  and  discrimination  in  civil  service
that we had experienced since the Civil War.” Wilson
famously  praised  the  film  Birth  of  a  Nation  (1915),
which depicted the Reconstruction-era Ku Klux Klan
in heroic terms. In this way, Democratic control of the
White House helped set the tone for the Klan’s return
in the 1920s.

Progressive Legacies
In  the  industrial  era,  millions  of  Americans  decided
that their political system needed to adjust to new con-
ditions.  Whatever  their  specific  goals — and  whether
they  were  rural,  working-class,  or  middle-class —
reformers  faced  fierce  opposition  from  powerful
business  interests.  When  they  managed  to  win  key

regulatory laws, they often found these struck down by
hostile courts and were forced to try again by different
means. Thus the Progressive Era in the United States
should be understood partly by its limitations. Elitism
and racial prejudice, embodied in new voting restric-
tions, limited working-class power at the polls; African
Americans, their plight ignored by most white reform-
ers, faced segregation and violence. Divided power in a
federalist system blocked passage of uniform national
policies  on  such  key  issues  as  child  labor.  Key  social
welfare programs that became popular in Europe dur-
ing these decades, including national health insurance
and  old-age  pensions,  scarcely  made  it  onto  the
American agenda until the 1930s.

An  international  perspective  suggests  several  rea-
sons  for  American  resistance  to  such  programs.
Business interests in the United States were exception-
ally successful and powerful, flush with recent expan-
sion. At the time, also, voters in countries with older,
more native-born populations tended to support gov-
ernment regulation and welfare spending to a greater
extent  than  their  counterparts  in  countries  with
younger  populations  and  large  numbers  of  immi-
grants. Younger voters, understandably, seem to have
been  less  concerned  than  older  voters  about  health
insurance  and  old-age  security.  Divisions  in  the
American  working  class  also  played  a  role.  Black,
immigrant,  and  native-born  white  laborers  often
viewed one another as enemies or strangers rather than
as  members  of  a  single  class  with  common  interests.
This helps explain why the Socialist Party drew, at peak,
less than 6 percent of the U.S. vote at a time when its
counterparts in Finland, Germany, and France drew 40
percent or more. Lack of pressure from a strong, self-
conscious  workingmen’s  party  contributed  to  more
limited results in the United States.

But  it  would  be  wrong  to  underestimate  progres-
sive achievements. Over several decades, in this period,
more and more prosperous Americans began to sup-
port  stronger  economic  regula-
tions. Even the most cautious, elite
progressives  recognized  that  the
United  States  had  entered  a  new
era.  Multinational  corporations
overshadowed small businesses; in
vast  cities,  old  support  systems
based  on  village  and  kinship
melted  away.  Outdated  political  institutions — from
the spoils system to urban machines — would no lon-
ger do. Walter Lippmann, founding editor of the pro-
gressive magazine New Republic, observed in 1914 that
Americans had “no precedents to guide us, no wisdom

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What factors explain
the limits of progres-
sive reform in the
United States?

