664

PART 6

  INDUSTRIALIZING AMERICA: UPHEAVALS AND EXPERIMENTS, 1877–1917

that wasn’t made for a simpler age.” Progressives cre-
ated new wisdom. By 1917, they had drawn blueprints
for a modern American state, one whose powers more
suited the needs of an industrial era.

SUMMARY
The Progressive Era emerged from the political turmoil
of the 1880s and 1890s. In the 1880s, despite the limits
imposed  by  close  elections,  federal  and  state  govern-
ments  managed  to  achieve  important  administrative
and economic reforms. After 1888, Republican leaders
undertook more sweeping efforts, including the Sher-
man Antitrust Act, but failed in a quest to protect black
voting rights. In the South and West, the People’s Party
called for much stronger government intervention in
the  economy,  but  its  radical  program  drew  bitter
Republican and Democratic resistance.

The  depression  of  the  1890s  brought  a  wave  of
reaction.  Labor  unrest  threw  the  nation  into  crisis,

and  Cleveland’s  intransigence  over  the  gold  stan-
dard cost the Democrats dearly in the 1894 and 1896
elections.  While  Republicans  took  over  the  federal
government,  southern  Democrats  restricted  voting
rights in the Solid South. Federal courts struck down
regulatory
laws  and  supported  southern  racial
discrimination.

After McKinley’s assassination, Roosevelt launched
a program that balanced reform and private enterprise.
At both the federal and state levels, progressive reform-
ers made extensive use of elite expertise. At the grass-
roots,  black  reformers  battled  racial  discrimination;
women reformers worked on issues ranging from pub-
lic  health  to  women’s  working  conditions;  and  labor
activists tried to address the problems that fueled per-
sistent  labor  unrest.  The  election  of  1912  split  the
Republicans, giving victory to Woodrow Wilson, who
launched  a  Democratic  program  of  economic  and
labor reform. Despite the limits of the Progressive Era,
the  reforms  of  this  period  laid  the  foundation  for  a
modern American state.

