CHAPTER 20

  CHAPTER REVIEW

665

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

“waving the bloody shirt” (p. 638)
Gilded Age (p. 638)
Pendleton Act (p. 638)
Mugwumps (p. 639)
Sherman Antitrust Act (p. 642)
Lodge Bill (p. 642)
Omaha Platform (p. 643)
free silver (p. 645)
Williams v. Mississippi (p. 645)
Solid South (p. 646)
Lochner v. New York (p. 649)
Newlands Reclamation Act

(p. 651)

Wisconsin Idea (p. 652)

recall (p. 652)
referendum (p. 652)
National Child Labor Committee

(p. 652)

Muller v. Oregon (p. 652)
talented tenth (p. 655)
National Association for the
Advancement of Colored
People (NAACP) (p. 655)

Industrial Workers of the World

(p. 655)

New Nationalism (p. 656)
Federal Reserve Act (p. 662)
Clayton Antitrust Act (p. 662)

Key People

Mary E. Lease (p. 636)
William Jennings Bryan (p. 647)
Theodore Roosevelt (p. 650)
Robert La Follette (p. 652)
Louis Brandeis (p. 652)
W. E. B. Du Bois (p. 654)
Eugene V. Debs (p. 657)

REVIEW QUESTIONS  Answer these questions to demonstrate your

understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  Reformers in the Progressive Era came from differ-
ent  backgrounds  and  represented  several  distinct
interests.  What  were  some  of  those  backgrounds
and interests? How did their goals differ?

2.  How  did  the  economic  crisis  of  the  1890s  shape

American politics?

3.  Compare  the  reform  legislation  passed  during
Theodore  Roosevelt’s  presidency  with  that  of
Wilson’s term. How were these goals and achieve-
ments shaped by the broader agenda of the party

that held power (Republicans, in Roosevelt’s case,
and Democrats, in Wilson’s)?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Look  at  the
events  on  the  thematic  timeline  on  page  543.
Historians often call the decades from the 1880s to
the 1910s the Progressive Era. Given the limitations
and new problems that emerged during this time,
as well as the achievements of progressive policy-
making, do you think the name is warranted? What
other names might we suggest for this era?

