666

PART 6

  CHAPTER REVIEW

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  Returning  to
Chapter 17, review the strategies and goals of the
labor and agrarian organizations that flourished in
the  1880s.  The  People’s  Party  embodied  many  of
those ideas. Imagine that you are a journalist inter-
viewing a former People’s Party leader in 1917. To
what extent might he or she have said that progres-
sives  had,  after  1900,  fulfilled  the  agrarian-labor
agenda?  To  what  extent  might  he  or  she  criticize
progressives  for  failing  to  achieve  important
reforms?  What  do  you  conclude  from  this  about
the  similarities  and  differences  of  populism  and
progressivism?

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  Study  the  cartoons  that
appear on pages 642, 651, and 660. One depicts a
woman’s dressing room; two depict combat among
men. What do these cartoons tell us about the ways
that  ideals  of  masculinity  and  femininity  were
deployed  in  political  campaigns?  How  might  you
use  these  cartoons  to  explain  the  challenges  that
women  faced  in  winning  suffrage  during  the
Progressive Era? (For a counterpoint, you may also
want  to  examine  John  Sloan’s  drawing  about  the
Ludlow  Massacre,  on  p.  656,  and  compare  its
depiction of masculine violence to the other three
cartoons.)

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Charles Calhoun, Conceiving a New Republic (2006).
An excellent account of post-Reconstruction politics,
emphasizing issues of race and Republicans’ dilemma
in the South.

John Milton Cooper, The Warrior and the Priest
(1983). A provocative dual biography of Theodore
Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson.

Maureen Flanagan, America Reformed (2007). A
readable introduction and guide to further sources
on progressive movements.

Michael Kazin, A Godly Hero (2006). This biography
of William Jennings Bryan is a good starting point on
the era’s Democrats and their charismatic leader.

Robert C. McMath, American Populism (1993). A
lively history of the Farmers’ Alliance and People’s
Party.

Nancy Woloch, ed., Muller v. Oregon (1996). An
excellent analysis and collection of primary docu-
ments on this critical legal decision.

