7P A R T

C H A P T E R 21
An Emerging World
Power, 1890–1918

C H A P T E R 22
Cultural Conflict,
Bubble, and Bust,
1919–1932

C H A P T E R 23
Managing the Great
Depression, Forging
the New Deal,
1929–1939

C H A P T E R 2 4
The World at War,
1937–1945

668

Domestic and
Global Challenges
1890–1945

In a famous speech he made in 1918, amid the horrors of World War I,

President  Woodrow  Wilson  outlined  his  Fourteen  Points  for  interna-

tional peace. Americans, he argued, must help make the world “fit and

safe to live in.” “We cannot be separated in interest or divided in purpose,”

Wilson declared. Fifteen years later, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt

made a similar call for solidarity during the Great Depression. “We face

the  arduous  days  that  lie  before  us,”  he  said,  “in  the  warm  courage  of

national unity.” Soon, even more grit and determination were needed, as

Americans faced another looming world war.

In  these  years,  America’s  political  leaders  met  major  challenges

at home and abroad with bold responses. The exception to this pattern

was the 1920s, a decade of limited government under Republican presi-

dents who deferred to business interests and to Americans’ isolationist,

consumer-oriented mood. During the crises of World War I, the Great

Depression, and World War II, however, American voters called for — and

got — what Roosevelt called “action and action now.”

Wilson’s proposals met with failure at the end of World War I, but

Roosevelt  won  immense  popularity  for  his  measures  to  combat  the

depression, which helped millions of Americans survive unemployment

and hardship. FDR, however, had limited success in ending the depres-

sion  until  World  War  II  reignited  the  American  economy.  The  United

States emerged from the war with unprecedented global power, and the

federal government with a broad mandate for sustaining the new welfare

state. Part 7 addresses these transformations.

