America’s Rise to World Power

Modernity and Its Discontents

The United States became a major international power
after the 1890s, ﬁrst in the Western Hemisphere and
by the 1940s across the world, renewing debates at
home about America’s global role. After defeating
Spain in the War of 1898, the United States claimed
overseas colonies and asserted control over the Carib-
bean basin. Though President Wilson attempted to
maintain neutrality at the start of World War I, trade
ties and old alliances drew America into the conﬂict
on the Allied side. Wilson sought to inﬂuence the
peace, but Allied leaders ignored his proposals and
the Senate rejected the Treaty of Versailles. By war’s
end, the United States’s position on the world stage
remained uncertain.

The 1920s was an era of dollar diplomacy and U.S.

business expansion abroad. In the 1930s, faced with
isolationist sentiment at home and the rise of fascist
powers in Europe and Japan, the Roosevelt adminis-
tration steered a middle course. In the late 1930s, it
began to send aid to its traditional ally Great Britain
without committing U.S. forces, keeping the nation
out of the brewing wars in Europe and the Paciﬁc.
When the United States entered World War II in 1941,
it did so as part of an alliance with both England and
the Soviet Union against Germany and Japan (and their
ally Italy). The United States emerged from the war as
the dominant global power. These events are covered
in Chapters 21, 22, and 24.

World War I had a powerful domestic impact in the
United States. The Great Migration brought African
Americans northward, and Mexicans across the U.S.
border, to take up wartime jobs. A full-blown modern
consumer culture also emerged by the 1920s as radio,
cars, and Hollywood movies transformed leisure pas-
times. While many Americans embraced consumer
culture, others expressed deep fear and antagonism
toward a new modern sensibility, especially secularism
and sexual freedoms. Repressive impulses also came
from above; during World War I, the federal govern-
ment introduced new laws to police dissent, and the
country took a sharp right turn. A Red Scare, rollback
of labor and immigrant rights, and rising nativism
marked the political scene. A resurgent nationwide
Klan arose to target Catholics and Jews as well as
African Americans. Many cultural conﬂicts emerged:
the teaching of evolution in the schools angered
religious fundamentalists, while “wets” and “drys”
debated the prohibition of liquor.

Later events showed that racism took many forms:
the U.S. government deported hundreds of thousands
of people of Mexican descent during the Great Depres-
sion, including American citizens, and temporarily
imprisoned Japanese Americans in a mass relocation
policy during World War II. These, too, represented
battles over what a diverse, modern nation would
look like. We explore these conﬂicts in Chapters 21,
22, and 24.

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

669

