Domestic and
Global Challenges
1890–1945

Creation of the Welfare State

Thematic Understanding

This timeline arranges some of the important

events of this period into themes. Consider

the entries under “America in the World,”

“Politics and Power,” “Identity,” and “Ideas,

Beliefs, and Culture.” What connections do

you see between events on the world stage and

developments within the United States? What

impact did World War I, the Great Depression,

and World War II appear to have on American

politics, society, and culture?  >

In comparison with their progressive predecessors
(Chapters 19 and 20), Republican policymakers of
the 1920s believed in hands-off government. Their
policies likely helped trigger the Great Depression and
deepened its impact after it arrived. Starting in 1932,
Americans voted for change: President Franklin Roo-
sevelt’s New Deal programs, 1933–1937, expanded
federal responsibility for the welfare of ordinary citi-
zens, sweeping away the laissez faire individualism
of the previous decade. Though the New Deal faced
considerable challenges on the political right — espe-
cially from business and corporate leaders and a hostile
Supreme Court — the popularity of its programs, such
as Social Security, established a broad consensus that
the United States needed a modern welfare state to
regulate the economy and provide a basic safety net
for the nation’s citizens. For an exploration of the
New Deal, see Chapter 23.

Wartime measures went even further, as the govern-
ment mobilized the entire economy and tens of millions
of citizens to ﬁght the Axis powers. The welfare state
became a “warfare state,” and Congress gave the
president broad powers to ﬁght the war abroad and
reorganize the economy at home. Under the govern-
ment-directed wartime economy, business boomed
and productivity grew, but other policies, such as the
internment of Japanese immigrants and Japanese
Americans, violated fragile civil liberties, leaving a
mixed legacy. On America’s roles in World War II, see
Chapter 24.

670

