An Emerging World Power
1890–1918

Accepting the Democratic presiden-

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
As the United States became a major
power  on  the  world  stage,  what
ideas  and  interests  did  policymak-
ers seek to promote in international
affairs?

tial  nomination  in  1900,  William
Jennings Bryan delivered a famous
speech  denouncing  U.S.  military  occu-
pations  overseas.  “God  Himself,”  Bryan
declared,  “placed  in  every  human  heart
the  love  of  liberty. . . . He  never  made  a
race of people so low in the scale of civilization or intelligence that it would welcome a
foreign  master.”  At  the  time,  Republican  president  William  McKinley  was  leading  an
ambitious and popular plan of overseas expansion. The United States had asserted con-
trol  over  the  Caribbean,  claimed  Hawaii,  and  sought  to  annex  the  Philippines.  Bryan
failed to convince a majority of voters that imperialism — the exercise of military, politi-
cal, and economic power overseas — was the wrong direction. He lost the election by a
landslide.

By  the  1910s,  however,  American  enthusiasm  for  overseas  involvement  cooled.
Despite efforts to stay neutral, the United States got caught up in the global catastrophe
of World War I, which killed 8 million combatants, including over 50,000 U.S. soldiers.
By the war’s end, European powers’ grip on their colonial empires was weakening. The
United States also ceased acquiring overseas territories and pursued a different path. It
did so in part because the war brought dramatic changes at home, leaving Americans a
postwar legacy of economic upheaval and political disillusionment.

President Woodrow Wilson, who in 1913 appointed Bryan as his secretary of state,
tried to steer a middle course between revolutionary socialism and European-style impe-
rialism. In Wilson’s phrase, America would “make the world safe for democracy” while
unapologetically working to advance U.S. economic interests. The U.S. Senate, however,
rejected  the  1919  Treaty  of  Versailles  and  with  it  Wilson’s  vision,  leaving  the  nation’s
foreign policy in doubt. Should the United States try to promote democracy abroad? If
so, how? To what degree should the federal government seek to promote American
business interests? Under what conditions was overseas military action justiﬁed? When,
on the contrary, did it impinge on others’ sovereignty, endanger U.S. soldiers, and invite
disaster? Today’s debates over foreign policy still center to a large degree on questions
that Americans debated in the era of McKinley, Bryan, and Wilson, when the nation ﬁrst
asserted itself as a major world power.

21

C H A P T E R

FROM EXPANSION
TO IMPERIALISM
Foundations of Empire

The War of 1898

Spoils of War

A POWER AMONG
POWERS

The Open Door in Asia

The United States and Latin

America

THE UNITED STATES
IN WORLD WAR I
From Neutrality to War

“Over There”

War on the Home Front

CATASTROPHE AT
VERSAILLES

The Fate of Wilson’s Ideas

Congress Rejects the Treaty

672

