674

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

From Expansion
to Imperialism
Historians  used  to  describe  turn-of-the-twentieth-
century U.S. imperialism as something new and unprec-
edented. Now they stress continuities between foreign
policy  in  this  era  and  the  nation’s  earlier,  relentless
expansion across North America. Wars against native
peoples  had  occurred  almost  continuously  since  the
country’s founding; in the 1840s, the United States had
annexed  a  third  of  Mexico.  The  United  States  never
administered a large colonial empire, as did European
powers  like  Spain,  England,  and  Germany,  partly
because it had a plentiful supply of natural resources
in the American West. But policymakers undertook a
determined  quest  for  global  markets.  Events  in  the
1890s  opened  opportunities  to  pursue  this  goal  in
new ways.

Foundations of Empire
American  empire  builders  around  1900  fulfilled  a
vision laid out earlier by William Seward, secretary of
state under presidents Abraham Lincoln and Andrew
Johnson, who saw access to global markets as the key
to  power  (Chapter  16).  Seward’s  ideas  had  won  only
limited  support  at  the  time,  but  the  severe  economic
depression  of  the  1890s  brought  Republicans  into
power and Seward’s ideas back into vogue. Confronting
high unemployment and mass protests, policymakers
feared American workers would embrace socialism or
Marxism. The alternative, they believed, was to create
jobs and prosperity at home by selling U.S. products in
overseas markets.

Intellectual  trends  also  favored  imperialism.  As
early  as  1885,  in  his  popular  book  Our  Country,
Congregationalist  minister  Josiah  Strong  urged  Pro t-
estants  to  proselytize  overseas.  He  predicted  that  the
American “Anglo-Saxon race,” which represented “the
largest liberty, the purest Christianity, the highest civi-
lization,”  would  “spread  itself  over  the  earth.”  Such
arguments  were  grounded  in  American  exceptional-
ism, the idea that the United States had a unique des-
tiny to foster democracy and civilization.

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did imperialism in the
1890s reﬂect both conti-
nuities and changes from
earlier eras?

As  Strong’s  exhortation  sug-
gested,  imperialists  also  drew  on
popular  racial  theories,  which
claimed  that  people  of  “Anglo-
Saxon”  descent — English  and
often German — were superior to
all  others.  “Anglo-Saxon”  rule

over foreign people of color made sense in an era when,
at  home,  most  American  Indians  and  Asian  immi-
grants  were  denied  citizenship  and  most  southern
blacks  were  disenfranchised.  Imperialists  argued  that
“free land” on the western frontier was dwindling, and
thus  new  outlets  needed  to  be  found  for  American
energy  and  enterprise.  Responding  to  critics  of  U.S.
occupation  of  the  Philippines,  Theodore  Roosevelt
scoffed: if Filipinos should control their own islands, he
declared, then America was “morally bound to return
Arizona to the Apaches.”

Imperialists  also  justified  their  views  through
racialized  Social  Darwinism  (Chapter  18).  Josiah
Strong, for example, predicted that with the globe fully
occupied, a “competition of races” would ensue, with
victory based on “survival of the fittest.” Fear of ruth-
less competition drove the United States, like European
nations, to invest in the latest weapons. Policymakers
saw that European powers were amassing steel-plated
battleships and carving up Africa and Asia among them-
selves.  In  his  book  The  Influence  of  Sea  Power  upon
History (1890), U.S. naval officer Alfred Mahan urged
the United States to enter the fray, observing that naval
power had been essential to past empires. As early as
1886, Congress ordered construction of two steel-hulled
battleships, the USS Texas and USS Maine; in 1890, it
appropriated  funds  for  three  more,  a  program  that
expanded over the next two decades.

During  Grover  Cleveland’s  second  term  (1893–
1897),  his  secretary  of  state,  Richard  Olney,  turned
to  direct  confrontation.  He  warned  Europe  to  stay
away from Latin America, which he saw as the United
States’s  rightful sphere of influence. Without consult-
ing the nation of Venezuela, Olney suddenly demanded
in 1895 that Britain resolve a long-standing border dis-
pute between Venezuela and Britain’s neighboring col-
ony,  British  Guiana.  Invoking  the  Monroe  Doctrine,
which  stated  that  the  Western  Hemisphere  was  off-
limits to further European colonization, Olney warned
that  the  United  States  would  brook  no  challenge  to
its  interests.  Startled,  Britain  agreed  to  arbitrate.  U.S.
power was on the rise.

The War of 1898
Events  in  the  Caribbean  presented  the  United  States
with far greater opportunities. In 1895, Cuban patriots
mounted  a  major  guerrilla  war  against  Spain,  which
had  lost  most  of  its  other  New  World  territories.
The  Spanish  commander  responded  by  rounding
up  Cuban  civilians  into  concentration  camps,  where
as  many  as  200,000  died  of  starvation,  exposure,

