CHAPTER 21

  An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918

675

or dysentery. In the United States, “yellow journalists”
such as William Randolph Hearst turned their plight
into a cause célèbre. Hearst’s coverage of Spanish atroc-
ities fed a surge of nationalism, especially among those
who feared that industrialization was causing American
men  to  lose physical  strength  and  valor. The  govern-
ment should not pass up this opportunity, said Indiana
senator Albert Beveridge, to “manufacture manhood.”
Congress called for Cuban independence.

President Cleveland had no interest in supporting
the Cuban rebellion but worried over Spain’s failure to
end it. The war disrupted trade and damaged American-
owned  sugar  plantations  on  the  island.  Moreover,  an
unstable  Cuba  was  incompatible  with  U.S.  strategic
interests, including a proposed canal whose Caribbean
approaches  had  to  be  safeguarded.  Taking  office  in
1897, President William McKinley took a tough stance.
In September, a U.S. diplomat informed Spain that it
must ensure an “early and certain peace” or the United
States would step in. At first, this hard line seemed to
work:  Spain’s  conservative  regime  fell,  and  a  liberal
government,  taking  office  in  October  1897,  offered
Cuba limited self-rule. But Spanish loyalists in Havana
rioted  against  this  proposal,  while  Cuban  rebels  held
out for full independence.

In February 1898, Hearst’s  New  York  Journal pub-
lished a private letter in which a Spanish minister to the
United States belittled McKinley. The minister, Dupuy
de Lôme, resigned, but exposure of the de Lôme letter
intensified  Americans’  indignation  toward  Spain.  The
next week brought shocking news: the U.S. battle cruiser
Maine had exploded and sunk in Havana harbor, with
260 seamen lost. “Whole Country Thrills with the War
Fever,”  proclaimed  the  New  York  Journal.  “Remember
the Maine” became a national chant. Pop u lar passions
were now a major factor in the march toward war.

McKinley  assumed  the  sinking  of  the  Maine  had
been accidental. Improbably, though, a naval board of
inquiry  blamed  an  underwater  mine,  fueling  public
outrage. (Later investigators disagreed: the more likely
cause  was  a  faulty  ship  design  that  placed  explosive
munitions too close to coal bunkers, which were prone
to  fire.)  No  evidence  linked  Spain  to  the  purported
mine,  but  if  a  mine  sank  the  Maine,  then  Spain  was
responsible for not protecting the ship.

Business  leaders  became  impatient,  believing  war
was  preferable  to  an  unending  Cuban  crisis.  On
March 27, McKinley cabled an ultimatum to Madrid:
an  immediate  ceasefire  in  Cuba  for  six  months  and,
with  the  United  States  mediating,  peace  negotiations
with  the  rebels.  Spain,  while  desperate  to  avoid  war,
balked at the added demand that mediation must result

in Cuban independence. On April 11, McKinley asked
Congress  for  authority  to  intervene  in  Cuba  “in  the
name  of  civilization,  [and]  in  behalf  of  endangered
American interests.”

Historians long referred to the ensuing fight as the
Spanish-American War, but because that name ignores
the central role of Cuban revolutionaries, many histo-
rians now call the three-way conflict the War of 1898.
Though Americans widely admired Cubans’ aspirations
for  freedom,  the  McKinley  administration  defeated  a
congressional  attempt  to  recognize  the  rebel  govern-
ment. In response, Senator Henry M. Teller of Colorado
added an amendment to the war bill, disclaiming any
intention  by  the  United  States  to  occupy  Cuba.  The
Teller  Amendment  reassured  Americans  that  their
country would uphold democracy abroad as well as at
home. McKinley’s expectations differed. He wrote pri-
vately, “We must keep all we get; when the war is over
we must keep what we want.”

On  April  24,  1898,  Spain  declared  war  on  the
United States. The news provoked full-blown war fever.
Across the country, young men enlisted for the fight.
Theodore Roosevelt, serving in the War Department,
resigned to become lieutenant colonel of a cavalry reg-
iment.  Recruits  poured  into  makeshift  bases  around
Tampa, Florida, where confusion reigned. Rifles failed
to arrive; food was bad, sanitation worse. No provision
had been made for getting troops to Cuba, so the gov-
ernment hastily collected a fleet of yachts and commer-
cial  boats.  Fortunately,  the  regular  army  was  a  disci-
plined,  professional  force;  its  28,000  seasoned  troops
provided  a  nucleus  for  200,000  volunteers.  The  navy
was  in  better  shape:  Spain  had  nothing  to  match
America’s seven battleships and armored cruisers. The
Spanish admiral bitterly predicted that his fleet would
“like Don Quixote go out to fight windmills and come
back with a broken head.”

The first, decisive military engagement took place
in  the  Pacific.  This  was  the  handiwork  of  Theodore
Roosevelt, who, in his government post, had gotten the
intrepid Commodore George Dewey appointed com-
mander of the Pacific fleet. In the event of war, Dewey
had  instructions  to  sail  immediately  for  the  Spanish-
owned Philippines. When war was declared, Roosevelt
confronted  his  surprised  superior  and  pressured  him
into validating Dewey’s instructions. On May 1, 1898,
American  ships cornered  the  Spanish  fleet  in  Manila
Bay  and  destroyed  it.  Manila,  the  Philippine  capital,
fell  on  August  13.  “We  must  on  no  account  let  the
[Philippines]  go,”  declared  Senator  Henry  Cabot
Lodge. McKinley agreed. The United States now had a
major foothold in the western Pacific.

