676

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

U.S. naval base at Pearl Harbor. Four years later, suc-
ceeding  her  brother  as  Hawaii’s  monarch,  Queen
Liliuokalani  made  known  her  frustration  with  these
treaties.  In  response,  an  Annexation  Club  of  U.S.-
backed  planters  organized  secretly  and  in  1892,  with
the help of U.S. Marines, overthrew the queen and then
negotiated  a  treaty  of  annexation.  Grover  Cleveland,
however, rejected it when he entered office, declaring
that  it  would  violate  America’s  “unbroken  tradition”
against acquiring territory overseas.

Dewey’s victory in Manila delivered what the plant-
ers wanted: Hawaii acquired strategic value as a half-
way station to the Philippines. In July 1898, Congress
voted  for  annexation,  over  the  protests  of  Hawaii’s
deposed queen. “Oh, honest Americans,” she pleaded,
“as Christians hear me for my down-trodden people!
Their form of government is as dear to them as yours
is precious to you. Quite as  warmly as  you love your
country, so they love theirs.” But to the great powers,
Hawaii was not a country. One congressman dismissed
Hawaii’s  monarchy  as  “absurd,  grotesque,  tottering”;
the “Aryan race,” he declared, would “rescue” the islands
from it.

To see a longer excerpt from Queen Liliuokalani’s
appeal, along with other primary sources from this
period, see Sources for America’s History.

Further U.S. annexations took on their own logic.
The navy pressed for another coaling base in the cen-
tral Pacific; that meant Guam, a Spanish island in the
Marianas. A strategic base was needed in the Caribbean;
that meant Puerto Rico. By early summer, before U.S.
troops  had  fired  a  shot  in  Cuba,  McKinley’s  broader
war aims were crystallizing.

In Cuba, Spanish forces were depleted by the long
guerrilla  war.  Though  poorly  trained  and  equipped,
American forces had the advantages of a demoralized
foe and knowledgeable Cuban allies. The main battle
occurred on July 1 at San Juan Hill, near Santiago, where
the  Spanish  fleet  was  anchored.  Roosevelt’s  Rough
Riders took the lead, but four African American regi-
ments bore the brunt of the fighting. Observers credited
much of the victory to the “superb gallantry” of these
soldiers.  Spanish  troops  retreated  to  a  well-fortified
second  line,  but  U.S.  forces  were  spared  the  test  of  a
second assault. On July 3, the Spanish fleet in Santiago
harbor  tried  a  desperate  run  through  the  American
blockade and was destroyed. Days later, Spanish forces
surrendered.  American  combat  casualties  had  been
few;  most  U.S.  soldiers’  deaths  had  resulted  from
malaria and yellow fever.

Hawaii’s Queen

Hawaiian queen Liliuokalani (1838–1917) was the great-
granddaughter of Keaweaheulu, founder of the Kamehameha
dynasty that had ruled the islands since the late 1700s.
Liliuokalani assumed the throne after her brother’s death
in 1891. As an outspoken critic, however, of treaties ced-
ing power to U.S. economic interests, she was deposed
three years later by a cabal of sugar planters who estab-
lished a republic. When secret plans to revolt and restore
the monarchy were discovered, the queen was imprisoned
for a year in Iolani Palace. She lived the remainder of her life
in Hawaii but never regained power. Fluent in English and
inﬂuenced from childhood by Congregational missionaries,
she used this background to advocate for her people; in her
book Hawaii’s Story by Hawaii’s Queen (1898), she appealed
for justice from fellow Christians. George Bacon Collection,
Hawaii State Archives.

Dewey’s victory directed policymakers’ attention to
Hawaii.  Nominally  independent,  these  islands  had
long been subject to U.S. influence, including a horde
of  resident  American  sugarcane  planters.  An  1876
treaty between the United States and the island’s mon-
arch gave Hawaiian sugar free access to the American
market,  without  tariff  payments,
and  Hawaii  pledged  to  sign  no
such  agreement  with  any  other
power.  When  this  treaty  was
renewed  in  1887,  Hawaii  also
granted a long-coveted lease for a

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Why did the United States
go to war against Spain in
1898, and what led to U.S.
victory?

