CHAPTER 21

  An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918

677

The Battle of San Juan Hill

On July 1, 1898, the key battle for Cuba took place on heights overlooking Santiago. African American
troops bore the brunt of the ﬁghting. Although generally overlooked, black soldiers’ role in the San Juan
battle is done justice in this contemporary lithograph, without the demeaning stereotypes by which blacks
were normally depicted in an age of intensifying racism. Note, however, that as in the Civil War, blacks
enlisted as foot soldiers; their ofﬁcers were white. Library of Congress.

Spoils of War
The United States and Spain quickly signed a prelimi-
nary peace agreement in which Spain agreed to liberate
Cuba and cede Puerto Rico and Guam to the United
States. But what would happen to the Philippines, an
immense  archipelago  that  lay  more  than  5,000  miles
from  California?  Initially,  the  United  States  aimed  to
keep  only  Manila,  because  of  its  fine  harbor.  Manila
was not defensible, however, without the whole island
of Luzon, on which it sat. After deliberating, McKinley
found a justification for annexing all of the Philippines.
He decided that “we could not leave [the Filipinos] to
themselves — they were unfit for self-rule.”

This  declaration  provoked  heated  debate.  Under
the Constitution, as Republican senator George F. Hoar
argued, “no power is given to the Federal Government
to  acquire  territory  to  be  held  and  governed  perma-
nently  as  colonies”  or  “to  conquer  alien  people  and
hold them in subjugation.” Leading citizens and peace
advocates,  including  Jane  Addams  and  Mark  Twain,
enlisted in the anti-imperialist cause. Steel king Andrew
Carnegie  offered  $20  million  to  purchase  Philippine
independence. Labor leader Samuel Gompers warned
union members about the threat of competition from
low-wage Filipino immigrants. Anti-imperialists, how-
ever,  were  a  diverse  lot.  Some  argued  that  Filipinos
were perfectly capable of self-rule; others warned about

