678

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

the dangers of annexing eight million Filipinos of an
“inferior race.” “No matter whether they are fit to gov-
ern themselves or not,” declared a Missouri congress-
man, “they are not fit to govern us.”

Beginning  in  late  1898,  anti-imperialist  leagues
sprang up around the country, but they never sparked a
mass movement. On the contrary, McKinley’s “splendid
little war” proved immensely popular. Confronted with
that  reality,  Democrats  waffled.  Their  standard-bearer,
William  Jennings  Bryan,  decided
not to stake Demo crats’ future on
opposition  to  a  policy  that  he
believed  to  be  irreversible.  He
threw  his  party  into  turmoil  by
declaring last-minute support for
McKinley’s proposed treaty. Hav-
ing  met  military  defeat,  Spanish
representatives had little choice. In
the Treaty of Paris, Spain ceded the Philippines to the
United States for $20 million.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What were the long-term
results of the U.S. victory
over Spain, in Hawaii and
in former Spanish posses-
sions?

Annexation was not as simple as U.S. policymakers
had  expected.  On  February  4,  1899,  two  days  before
the  Senate  ratified  the  treaty,  fighting  broke  out
between American and Filipino patrols on the edge of
Manila. Confronted by annexation, rebel leader Emilio
Aguinaldo  asserted  his  nation’s  independence  and
turned his guns on occupying American forces. Though
Aguinaldo found it difficult to organize a mass-based
resistance  movement,  the  ensuing  conflict  between
Filipino  nationalists  and  U.S.  troops  far  exceeded  in
length and ferocity the war just concluded with Spain.
Fighting tenacious guerrillas, the U.S. Army resorted to
the same tactics Spain had employed in Cuba: burning
crops and villages and rounding up civilians. Atrocities
became commonplace on both sides. In three years of
warfare,  4,200  Americans  and  an  estimated  200,000
Fil ipinos died; many of the latter were dislocated civil-
ians, particularly children, who succumbed to malnu-
trition and disease.

McKinley’s  convincing  victory  over  William
Jennings Bryan in 1900 suggested popular satisfaction
with America’s overseas adventures, even in the face of
dogged  Filipino  resistance  to  U.S.  rule.  The  fighting
ended in 1902, and William Howard Taft, appointed as
governor-general  of  the  Philippines,  sought  to  make
the territory a model of roadbuilding and sanitary engi-
neering.  Yet  misgivings  lingered  as  Americans  con-
fronted the brutality of the war. Philosopher William
James noted that the United States had destroyed “these
islanders by the thousands, their villages and cities. . . .
Could there be any more damning indictment of that
whole  bloated  ideal  termed  ‘modern  civilization’?”
(American Voices, p. 680).

Constitutional  issues  also  remained  unresolved.
The treaty, while guaranteeing freedom of religion  to
inhabitants of ceded Spanish territories, withheld any
promise of citizenship. It was up to Congress to decide
Filipinos’ “civil rights and political status.” In 1901, the
Supreme Court upheld this provision in a set of deci-
sions  known  as  the  Insular  Cases.  The  Constitution,
declared the Court, did not automatically extend citi-
zenship  to  people  in  acquired  territories;  Congress
could decide. Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines
were thus marked as colonies, not future states.

The next year, as a condition for withdrawing from
Cuba, the United States forced the newly independent
island to accept a proviso in its constitution called the
Platt  Amendment  (1902).  This  blocked  Cuba  from
making  a  treaty  with  any  country  except  the  United
States and gave the United States the right to intervene
in  Cuban  affairs  if  it  saw  fit.  Cuba  also  granted  the
United  States  a  lease  on  Guantánamo  Bay  (still  in
effect), where the U.S. Navy built a large base. Cubans’
hard-fought independence was limited; so was that of
Filipinos. Eventually, the Jones Act of 1916 committed
the  United  States  to  Philippine  independence  but  set
no  date.  (The  Philippines  at  last  achieved  indepen-
dence in 1946.) Though the war’s carnage had rubbed
off some of the moralizing gloss, America’s global aspi-
rations remained intact.

A Power Among Powers
No one appreciated America’s emerging influence more
than the man who, after William McKinley’s assassina-
tion,  became  president  in  1901.  Theodore  Roosevelt
was an avid student of world affairs who called on “the
civilized  and  orderly  powers  to  insist  on  the  proper
policing of the world.” He meant, in part, directing the
affairs of “backward peoples.” For Roosevelt, imperial-
ism  went  hand  in  hand  with  domestic  progressivism
(Chapter 20). He argued that a strong federal govern-
ment, asserting itself both at home and abroad, would
enhance economic stability and political order. Over-
seas, Roosevelt sought to arbitrate disputes and main-
tain a global balance of power, but he also asserted U.S.
interests.

The Open Door in Asia
U.S. officials and business leaders had a burning inter-
est  in  East  Asian  markets,  but  they  were  entering  a
crowded field (Map 21.1). In the late 1890s, following
Japan’s victory in the Sino-Japanese War of 1894–1895,
Japan,  Russia,  Germany,  France,  and  Britain  divided

