MAP 21.1
The Great Powers in East Asia, 1898–1910

European powers established dominance
over China by way of “treaty ports,” where
the powers based their naval forces, and
through “spheres of inﬂuence” that
extended from the ports into the hinter-
land. This map reveals why the United
States had a weak hand: it lacked a
presence on this colonized terrain. An
uprising of Chinese nationalists in 1900
gave the United States a chance to insert
itself on the Chinese mainland by sending
an American expeditionary force. Ameri-
can diplomats made the most of the
opportunity to defend U.S. commercial
interests in China. As noted in the key, all
place names in this map are those in use
in 1910: Modern Beijing, for example, is
shown as Peking.

CHAPTER 21

  An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918

679

R U S S I A
TRANS-SIBERIANR.R.

L. Baikal

(cid:2)
Chita

Irkutsk

(cid:2)

OUTER MONGOLIA
(Russian influence)

INNERMONGOLIA

HwangHo

Peking

(cid:2)
(cid:6)
Tientsin

CHINESEEASTERNR.R.
AmurR.

MANCHURIA

Sakhalin

Harbin
(cid:2)

Vladivostok

(cid:2)

Sea of
Japan

(cid:2)

Port
Arthur

(cid:2)

Seoul
KOREA

SINKIANG

TIBET

Lhasa

(cid:2)

NEPAL

INDIA

C H I N A

Chungking

(cid:6)
YangtzeR.

Nanking
Hankow
(cid:6)

(cid:6)

(cid:6)
Shanghai
(cid:6)
Ningpo
(cid:6)
Wenchow

(cid:6)

Foochow

BHUTAN

KWANGCHOWAN (Fr.)

Calcutta

(cid:2)
Colonial
possessions

BURMA

Spheres
of influence

Hanoi

(cid:2)

Wuchow

Amoy
(cid:6)

(cid:6)(cid:6)
Canton
(cid:2)(cid:2)
Hong
Macao
Kong (Br.)
(Port.)

American
British
French
Japanese
Russian
German

(cid:6)

Chinese treaty ports
open for foreign trade
Place names in common use, 1910

South
China
Sea

SIAM
(cid:2)

Bangkok

FRENCH
INDOCHINA
(cid:2)
Saigon

Formosa
(Taiwan)

P A C I F I C
O C E A N

Manila

(cid:2)

PHILIPPINE
ISLANDS

0

0

500

1,000 miles

500

1,000 kilometers

KURILE
IS.

JAPAN

Kobe

(cid:2)

Tokyo

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Yokohama

N

W

RYUKYU IS.
(Japan)

E

S

coastal  China  into  spheres  of  influence.  Fearful  of
being  shut  out,  U.S.  Secretary  of  State  John  Hay  sent
these powers a note in 1899, claiming the right of equal
trade access — an “open  door” — for all nations seek-
ing to do business in China. The United States lacked
leverage in Asia, and Hay’s note elicited only noncom-
mittal  responses.  But  he  chose  to  interpret  this  as
acceptance of his position.

When  a  secret  society  of  Chinese  nationalists,
known outside China as “Boxers” because of their pug-
nacious political stance, rebelled against foreign occu-
pation in 1900, the United States sent 5,000 troops to
join a multinational campaign to break the nationalists’
siege  of  European  offices  in  Beijing.  Hay  took  this
opportunity  to  assert  a  second  open  door  principle:
China must be preserved as a “territorial and adminis-
trative entity.” As long as the legal fiction of an inde-
pendent China survived, Americans could claim equal
access to its market.

European  and  American  plans  were,  however,
unsettled by Japan’s emergence as East Asia’s dominant
power.  A  decade  after  its  victory  over  China,  Japan
responded to Russian bids for control of both Korea

and  Manchuria,  in  northern  China,  by  attacking  the
tzar’s fleet at Russia’s leased Chinese port. In a series of
brilliant  victories,  the  Japanese  smashed  the  Russian
forces. Westerners were shocked: for the first time, a
European power had been defeated by a non-Western
nation. Conveying both admiration and alarm, Ameri-
can  cartoonists  sketched  Japan  as  a  martial  artist
knocking down the Russian giant. Roosevelt mediated
a  settlement  to  the  war  in  1905,  receiving  for  his
efforts  the  first  Nobel  Peace  Prize  awarded  to  an
American.

Though  he  was  contemptuous  of  other  Asians,
Roosevelt  respected  the  Japanese,  whom  he  called  “a
wonderful  and  civilized  people.”  More  important,  he
understood  Japan’s  rising  military  might  and  aligned
himself  with  the  mighty.  The  United  States  approved
Japan’s “protectorate” over Korea in 1905 and, six years
later,  its  seizure  of  full  control.
asserting  harsh
With
authority  over  Manchuria,  ener-
getic  Chinese  diplomat  Yüan
Shih-k’ai  tried  to  encourage  the
United  States  to  intervene.  But

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
What factors constrained
and guided U.S. actions in
Asia and in Latin America?

Japan

