A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Debating the

Philippines

As  President  McKinley  privately  acknowledged  in  writing — “when  the  war  is
over  we  must  keep  what  we  want” — seizing  the  Philippines  was  an  act  of
national self-interest. Of the alternatives, it was the one that seemed best calcu-
lated to serve America’s strategic aims in Asia. But McKinley’s geopolitical deci-
sion had unintended consequences. For one, it provoked a bloody insurrection.
For  another,  it  challenged  the  United  States’s  democratic  principles.  As  these
consequences hit home, a divided Senate set up a special committee and held
closed hearings. Congressional testimony is a source much prized by historians.
Though  some  of  it  is  prepared,  once  questioning  begins,  testimony  becomes
unscripted and can be especially revealing. The following documents are taken
from the 1902 testimony before the Senate Committee on the Philippines.

Ideals

General  Arthur  MacArthur  (1845–1912)  was  in  on  the
action  in  the  Philippines  almost  from  the  start.  He  com-
manded one of the ﬁrst units to arrive there in 1898 and in
1900 was reassigned as the islands’ military governor and
general commander of the troops. His standing as a mili-
tary  man — holder  of  the  Congressional  Medal  of  Honor
from the Civil War — was matched later by his more famous
son, Douglas MacArthur, who fought in the Paciﬁc during
World  War  II.  Here  the  elder  MacArthur  explains  in  pre-
pared  testimony  his  vision  of  America’s  mission  to  the
Philippines.

At the time I returned to Manila [May 1900] to assume
the supreme command it seemed to me that . . . our occu-
pation of the island was simply one of the necessary con-
sequences in logical sequence of our great prosperity, and
to doubt the wisdom of [occupation] was simply to doubt
the stability of our own institutions and in effect to declare
that a self-governing nation was incapable of successfully
resisting strains arising naturally from its own productive
energy. It seemed to me that our conception of right, jus-
tice, freedom, and personal liberty was the precious fruit
of centuries of strife . . . [and that] we must regard our-
selves simply as the custodians of imperishable ideas
held in trust for the general benefit of mankind. In other
words, I felt that we had attained a moral and intellectual
height from which we were bound to proclaim to all as
the occasion arose the true message of humanity as
embodied in the principles of our own institutions. . . .
All other governments that have gone to the East
have simply planted trading establishments; they have
not materially affected the conditions of the people. . . .
There is not a single establishment, in my judgment, in
Asia to-day that would survive five years if the original
power which planted it was withdrawn therefrom.

680

The contrasting idea with our idea is this: In planting
our ideas we plant something that can not be destroyed.
To my mind the archipelago is a fertile soil upon which
to plant republicanism. . . . We are planting the best tradi-
tions, the best characteristics of Americanism in such a way
that they can never be removed from that soil. That in itself
seems to me a most inspiring thought. It encouraged me
during all my efforts in those lands, even when conditions
seemed most disappointing, when the people themselves,
not appreciating precisely what the remote consequences
of our efforts were going to be, mistrusted us; but that fact
was always before me — that going deep down into that
fertile soil were the indispensable ideas of Americanism.

Skepticism

At  this  point,  the  general  was  interrupted  by  Colorado
senator Thomas Patterson, a Populist-Democrat and a vocal
anti-imperialist.

Sen. Patterson: Do you mean that imperishable idea
of which you speak is the right of self-government?
Gen. MacArthur: Precisely so; self-government
regulated by law as I understand it in this Republic.
Sen. Patterson: Of course you do not mean self-
government regulated by some foreign and superior
power?

Gen. MacArthur: Well, that is a matter of evolution,
Senator. We are putting these institutions there so they
will evolve themselves just as here and everywhere else
where freedom has flourished. . . .

Sen. Patterson [after the General concluded his state-
ment]: Do I understand your claim of right and duty to
retain the Philippine Islands is based upon the proposi-
tion that they have come to us upon the basis of our
morals, honorable dealing, and unassailable international
integrity?

