Gen. MacArthur: That proposition is not questioned

by anybody in the world, excepting a few people in the
United States. . . . We will be benefited, and the Filipino
people will be benefited, and that is what I meant by the
original proposition —

Sen. Patterson: Do you mean the Filipino people that

are left alive?

Gen. MacArthur: I mean the Filipino people. . . .
Sen. Patterson: You mean those left alive after they

have been subjugated?

Gen. MacArthur: I do not admit that there has been
any unusual destruction of life in the Philippine Islands.
The destruction is simply the incident of war, and of
course it embraces only a very small percentage of the
total population.

. . . I doubt if any war — either international or civil,

any war on earth — has been conducted with as much
humanity, with as much careful consideration, with as
much self-restraint, as have been the American opera-
tions in the Philippine Archipelago. . . .

Realities

Brigadier General Robert P. Hughes, a military district com-
mander, testiﬁed as follows.

Q: In burning towns, what would you do? Would the
entire town be destroyed by fire or would only the offend-
ing portions of the town be burned?

Gen. Hughes: I do not know that we ever had a case of

burning what you would call a town in this country, but
probably a barrio or a sitio; probably half a dozen houses,
native shacks, where the insurrectos would go in and be
concealed, and if they caught a detachment passing they
would kill some of them.

Q: What did I understand you to say would be the

consequences of that?

Gen. Hughes: They usually burned the village.
Q: All of the houses in the village?
Gen. Hughes: Yes , every one of them.
Q: What would become of the inhabitants?
Gen. Hughes: That was their lookout.
Q: If these shacks were of no consequence what was

the utility of their destruction?

Gen. Hughes: The destruction was as a punishment.
They permitted these people to come in there and conceal
themselves. . . .

Q: The punishment in that case would fall, not upon
the men, who could go elsewhere, but mainly upon the
women and little children.

Gen. Hughes: The women and children are part of the

family, and where you wish to inflict a punishment you

can punish the man probably worse in that way than in
any other.

Q: But is that within the ordinary rules of civilized

warfare? . . .

Gen. Hughes: These people are not civilized.

Cruelties

Daniel J. Evans, Twelfth Infantry, describes the “water cure.”

Q: The committee would like to hear . . . whether you
were the witness to any cruelties inflicted upon the
natives of the Philippine Islands; and if so, under what
circumstances.

Evans: The case I had reference to was where they
gave the water cure to a native in the Ilicano Province at
Ilocos Norte . . . about the month of August 1900. There
were two native scouts with the American forces. They
went out and brought in a couple of insurgents. . . . They
tried to get from this insurgent . . . where the rest of the
insurgents were at that time. . . . The first thing one of the
Americans — I mean one of the scouts for the Americans —
grabbed one of the men by the head and jerked his head
back, and then they took a tomato can and poured water
down his throat until he could hold no more. . . . Then
they forced a gag into his mouth; they stood him up . . .
against a post and fastened him so that he could not move.
Then one man, an American soldier, who was over six feet
tall, and who was very strong, too, struck this native in
the pit of the stomach as hard as he could. . . . They kept
that operation up for quite a time, and finally I thought
the fellow was about to die, but I don’t believe he was as
bad as that, because finally he told them he would tell,
and from that day on he was taken away, and I saw no
more of him.

Source: From American Imperialism and the Philippine Insurrection, edited by Henry F.
Graff (Boston: Little, Brown, 1969). Reprinted by permission of the author.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  The text of this chapter offers the U.S. reasons for hold-
ing on to the Philippines. In what ways does General
MacArthur’s testimony conﬁrm, add to, or contradict the
text account?

2.  The chapter text also describes the anti-imperialist move-
ment. What does Senator Patterson’s cross-examination
of General MacArthur reveal about the anti-imperialists’
beliefs?

3.  Does the clash of ideas in these excerpts remain relevant
to our own time? How does it compare to what you
might read or hear about in a news source today?

681

