682

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Roosevelt  reviewed  America’s  weak  position  in  the
Pacific  and  declined.  He  conceded  that  Japan  had  “a
paramount interest in what surrounds the Yellow Sea.”
In 1908, the United States and Japan signed the Root-
Takahira  Agreement,  confirming  principles  of  free
oceanic  commerce  and  recognizing  Japan’s  authority
over Manchuria.

William Howard Taft entered the White House in
1909 convinced that the United States had been short-
changed  in  Asia.  He  pressed  for  a  larger  role  for
American  investors,  especially  in  Chinese  railroad
construction. Eager to promote U.S. business interests
abroad,  he  hoped  that  infusions  of  American  capital
would offset Japanese power. When the Chinese Revo-
lution of 1911 toppled the Manchu dynasty, Taft sup-
ported  the  victorious  Nationalists,  who  wanted  to
modernize their country and liberate it from Japanese
domination. The United States had entangled itself in
China and entered a long-term rivalry with Japan for
power in the Pacific, a competition that would culmi-
nate thirty years later in World War II.

The United States and Latin America
Roosevelt  famously  argued  that  the  United  States
should  “speak  softly  and  carry  a  big  stick.”  By  “big
stick,” he meant naval power, and rapid access to two

oceans  required  a  canal.  European  powers  conceded
the United States’s “paramount interest” in the Carib-
bean.  Freed  by  Britain’s  surrender  of  canal-building
rights in the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty (1901), Roosevelt
persuaded  Congress  to  authorize  $10  million,  plus
future payments of $250,000 per year, to purchase from
Colombia  a  six-mile  strip  of  land  across  Panama,  a
Colombian province.

Furious  when  Colombia  rejected  this  proposal,
Roosevelt  contemplated  outright  seizure  of  Panama
but  settled  on  a  more  roundabout  solution.  Pana ma-
nians, long separated from Colombia by remote jungle,
chafed under Colombian rule. The United States  lent
covert assistance to an independence movement, trig-
gering a bloodless revolution. On November 6, 1903,
the United States recognized the new nation of Panama;
two  weeks  later,  it  obtained  a  perpetually  renewable
lease on a canal zone. Roosevelt never regretted the ven-
ture, though in 1922 the United States paid Colombia
$25 million as a kind of conscience money.

To  build  the  canal,  the  U.S.  Army  Corps  of
Engineers hired 60,000 laborers, who came from many
countries  to  clear  vast  swamps,  excavate  240  million
cubic yards of earth, and construct a series of immense
locks. The project, a major engineering feat, took eight
years  and  cost  thousands  of  lives  among  the  workers
who built it. Opened in 1914, the Panama Canal gave

Panama Canal Workers, 1910

The 51-mile-long Panama Canal includes seven sets
of locks that can raise and lower ﬁfty large ships in a
twenty-four-hour period. Building the canal took eight
years and required over 50,000 workers, including
immigrants from Spain and Italy and many West
Indians such as these men, who accomplished some
of the worst-paid, most dangerous labor. Workers
endured the horrors of rockslides, explosions, and a
yellow fever epidemic that almost halted the project.
But American observers hailed the canal as a triumph
of modern science and engineering — especially in
medical efforts to eradicate the yellow fever and
malaria that had stymied earlier canal-building
efforts. Theodore Roosevelt insisted on making a
personal visit in November 1906. “He made the
men that were building there feel like they were
special people,” recalled the descendant of one
canal worker. “Give them pride of what they were
doing for the United States.” Library of Congress.

