CHAPTER 21

  An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918

683

the  United  States  a  commanding  position  in  the
Western Hemisphere.

Meanwhile,  arguing  that  instability  invited  Euro-
pean intervention, Roosevelt announced in 1904 that
the  United  States  would  police  all  of  the  Caribbean
(Map 21.2). This so-called  Roosevelt  Corollary to the
Monroe Doctrine actually turned that doctrine upside
down:  instead  of  guaranteeing  that  the  United  States
would protect its neighbors from Europe and help pre-
serve their independence, it asserted the United States’s
unrestricted  right  to  regulate  Caribbean  affairs.  The
Roosevelt  Corollary  was  not  a  treaty  but  a  unilateral
declaration sanctioned only by America’s military and
economic might. Citing it, the United States intervened
regularly in Caribbean and Central American nations
over the next three decades.

Entering  office  in  1913,  Democratic  president
Woodrow  Wilson  criticized  his  predecessors’  foreign
policy. He pledged that the United States would “never
again seek one additional foot of territory by conquest.”
This stance appealed to anti-imperialists in the Demo-
cratic base, including longtime supporters of William
Jennings  Bryan.  But  the  new  president  soon  showed
that, when American interests called for it, his actions
were not so different from those of Roosevelt and Taft.
Since the 1870s, Mexican dictator Porfirio Díaz had
created a friendly climate for American companies that

purchased Mexican plantations, mines, and oil fields.
By the early 1900s, however, Díaz feared the extraordi-
nary  power  of  these  foreign  interests  and  began  to
nationalize — reclaim — key resources. American inves-
tors who faced the loss of Mexican holdings began to
back Francisco Madero, an advocate of constitutional
government who was friendly to U.S. interests. In 1911,
Madero forced Díaz to resign and proclaimed himself
president. Thousands of poor Mexicans took this oppor-
tunity to mobilize rural armies and demand more rad-
ical  change.  Madero’s  position  was  weak,  and  several
strongmen sought to overthrow him; in 1913, he was
deposed  and  murdered  by  a  leading  general.  Imme-
diately, several other military men vied for control.

Wilson,  fearing  that  the  unrest  threatened  U.S.
interests, decided to intervene in the emerging Mexican
Revolution.  On  the  pretext  of  a  minor  insult  to  the
navy, he ordered U.S. occupation of the port of Veracruz
on  April  21,  1914,  at  the  cost  of  19  American  and
126  Mexican  lives.  Though  the  intervention  helped
Venustiano Carranza, the revolutionary leader whom
Wilson most favored, Carranza protested it as illegiti-
mate  meddling  in  Mexican  affairs.  Carranza’s  forces,
after  nearly  engaging  the  Americans  themselves,
entered  Mexico  City  in  triumph  a  few  months  later.
Though Wilson had supported this outcome, his inter-
ference caused lasting mistrust.

UNITED  STATES

Gulf  of  Mexico

BAHAMAS
(British)

A T L A N T I C
O C E A N

N

2

CUBA

DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC

PUERTO RICO
Acquired in 1898

W

E

S

Veracruz

(cid:2)
7

Guantánamo Bay

(cid:2)
4

8

9

BRITISH
HONDURAS

HONDURAS

JAMAICA
(British)

HAITI

VIRGIN IS.
Acquired in 1917

C a r i b b e a n   S e a

GUATEMALA

6

EL SALVADOR

COSTA
RICA
500 miles

250

0

0

250

500 kilometers

PANAMA

COLOMBIA

NICARAGUA

CANAL
ZONE

5

3

VENEZUELA

1
BR.
GUIANA

PACIFIC
OCEAN

MEXICO

U.S. possessions
U.S. interventions

1  Settled border dispute, 1895–1896
2  U.S. troops, 1898–1902,
     1906–1909, 1917–1922
3  Support of revolt, 1903
4  U.S. lease beginning in 1903
5  U.S. control beginning
     in 1903
6  U.S. troops, 1909–1910,
     1912–1925
7  Seized by U.S. Navy, 1914
8  U.S. troops, 1915–1934
9  U.S. troops, 1916–1924

MAP 21.2
Policeman of the Caribbean

After the War of 1898, the United States vigorously asserted its interest in the affairs of its
neighbors to the south. As the record of interventions shows, the United States truly became the
“policeman” of the Caribbean and Central America.

