684

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Pancho Villa, 1914

This photograph captures Mexican general Pancho
Villa at the height of his power, at the head of
Venustiano Carranza’s northern army in 1914. The
next year, he broke with Carranza and, among other
desperate tactics, began to attack Americans. Though
he had been much admired in the United States, Villa
instantly became America’s foremost enemy. He
evaded General John J. Pershing’s punitive expedition
of 1916, however, demonstrating the difﬁculties even
modern armies could have against a guerrilla foe who
knows his home terrain and can melt away into a
sympathetic population. Brown Brothers.

Carranza’s  victory  did  not  subdue  revolutionary
activity in Mexico. In 1916, General Francisco “Pancho”
Villa — a thug to his enemies, but a heroic Robin Hood
to many poor Mexicans — crossed the U.S.-Mexico bor-
der, killing sixteen American civilians and raiding the
town of Columbus, New Mexico. Wilson sent 11,000
troops to pursue Villa, a force that soon resembled an
army of occupation in northern Mexico. Mexican pub-
lic  opinion  demanded  withdrawal  as  armed  clashes
broke  out  between  U.S.  and  Mexican  troops.  At  the
brink  of  war,  both  governments  backed  off  and  U.S.
forces departed. But policymakers in Washington had
shown their intention to police not only the Caribbean
and  Central  America  but  also  Mexico  when  they
deemed it necessary.

The United States in
World War I
While  the  United  States  staked  claims  around  the
globe,  a  war  of  unprecedented  scale  was  brewing  in
Europe.  The  military  buildup  of  Germany,  a  rising
power, terrified its neighbors. To the east, the disinte-
grating  Ottoman  Empire  was  losing  its  grip  on  the
Balkans. Out of these conflicts, two rival power blocs
emerged:  the  Triple  Alliance  (Germany,  Austria-
Hungary, and Italy) and Triple Entente (Britain, France,
and  Russia).  Within  each  alliance,  national  govern-
ments pursued their own interests but were bound to
one another by both public and secret treaties.

Americans had no obvious stake in these develop-
ments.  In  1905,  when  Germany  suddenly  challenged
French  control  of  Morocco,  Theodore  Roosevelt
arranged an international conference to defuse the cri-
sis. Germany got a few concessions, but France — with
British backing — retained Morocco. Accomplished in
the same year that Roosevelt brokered peace between
Russia and Japan, the conference seemed another dip-
lomatic triumph. One U.S. official boasted that America
had  kept  peace  by  “the  power  of  our  detachment.”  It
was not to last.

From Neutrality to War
The spark that ignited World War I came in the Balkans,
where Austria-Hungary and Russia competed for con-
trol.  Austria’s  1908  seizure  of  Ottoman  provinces,
including Bosnia, angered the nearby Slavic nation of
Serbia  and  its  ally,  Russia.  Serbian  revolutionaries
recruited Bosnian Slavs to resist Austrian rule. In June
1914, in the city of Sarajevo, university student Gavrilo
Princip  assassinated  Archduke  Franz  Ferdinand,  heir
to the Austro-Hungarian throne.

Like dominos falling, the system of European alli-
ances pushed all the powers into war. Austria-Hungary
blamed Serbia for the assassination and declared war
on July 28. Russia, tied by secret treaty to Serbia, mobi-
lized against Austria-Hungary. This prompted Germany
to declare war on Russia and its ally France. As a prep-
aration  for  attacking  France,  Germany  launched  a
brutal  invasion  of  the  neutral  country  of  Belgium,
which caused Great Britain to declare war on Germany.

