CHAPTER 21

  An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918

685

Within  a  week,  most  of  Europe  was  at  war,  with  the
major  Allies — Great  Britain,  France,  and  Russia —
confronting  the  Central  Powers  of  Germany  and
Austria-Hungary. Two military zones emerged. On the
Western  Front,  Germany  battled  the  British  and
French;  on  the  Eastern  Front,  Germany  and  Austria-
Hungary fought Russia. Because most of the warring
nations held colonial empires, the conflict soon spread
to the Middle East, Africa, and Asia.

The so-called Great War wreaked terrible devasta-
tion. New technology, some of it devised in the United
States, made warfare deadlier than ever before. Every
soldier  carried  a  long-range,  high-velocity  rifle  that
could  hit  a  target  at  1,000  yards — a  vast  technical
advancement over the 300-yard range of rifles used in
the  U.S.  Civil  War.  The  machine  gun  was  even  more
deadly.  Its  American-born  inventor,  Hiram  Maxim,
had moved to Britain in the 1880s to follow a friend’s
advice:  “If  you  want  to  make  your  fortune,  invent
something  which  will  allow  those  fool  Europeans  to
kill each other more quickly.” New technologies helped
soldiers  in  defensive  positions;  once  advancing  Ger-
mans ran into French fortifications, they stalled. Across
a swath of Belgium and northeastern France, millions
of  soldiers  on  both  sides  hunkered  down  in  fortified
trenches.  During  1916,  repeatedly  trying  to  break
through  French  lines  at  Verdun,  Germans  suffered
450,000 casualties. The French fared even worse, with
550,000 dead or wounded. It was all to no avail. From
1914 to 1918, the Western Front barely moved.

At the war’s outbreak, President Wilson called on
Americans to be “neutral in fact as well as in name.” If
the United States remained out of the conflict, Wilson
reasoned,  he  could  influence  the  postwar  settlement,
much as Theodore Roosevelt had done after previous
conflicts. Even if Wilson had wished to, it would have
been  nearly  impossible  in  1914  to  unite  Americans
behind  the  Allies.  Many  Irish  immigrants  viewed
Britain as an enemy — based on its continued occupa-
tion of Ireland — while millions of German Americans
maintained ties to their homeland. Progressive-minded
Republicans,  such  as  Senator  Robert  La  Follette  of
Wisconsin, vehemently opposed taking sides in a Euro-
pean fight, as did socialists, who condemned the war as
a conflict among greedy capitalist empires. Two giants
of  American  industry,  Andrew  Carnegie  and  Henry
Ford, opposed the war. In December 1915, Ford sent a
hundred men and women to Europe on a “peace ship”
to urge an end to the war. “It would be folly,” declared
the  New  York  Sun,  “for  the  country  to  sacrifice  itself
to . . . the clash of ancient hatreds which is urging the
Old World to destruction.”

Flying Aces

As millions of men suffered and died in the trenches during
the Great War, a few hundred pilots did battle in the sky.
America’s best-known ace pilot was Eddie Rickenbacker
(right) of the 94th Aero Pursuit Squadron  —  a pilot who
was credited with shooting down twenty-six enemy aircraft.
The 94th was known as the hat-in-the-ring squadron, after
the American custom by which a combatant threw his hat
into the ring as an invitation to ﬁght. Note the hat insignia
on the plane. © Bettmann/Corbis.

The  Struggle  to  Remain  Neutral  The  United
States,  wishing  to  trade  with  all  the  warring  nations,
might  have  remained  neutral  if  Britain  had  not  held
commanding  power  at  sea.  In  September  1914,  the
British  imposed  a  naval  blockade  on  the  Central
Powers  to  cut  off  vital  supplies  of  food  and  military
equipment.  Though  the  Wilson  administration  pro-
tested this infringement of the rights of neutral carri-
ers, commerce with the Allies more than made up for
the economic loss. Trade with Britain and France grew
fourfold over the next two years, to $3.2 billion in 1916;

