686

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

by 1917, U.S. banks had lent the Allies $2.5 billion. In
contrast, American trade and loans to Germany stood
then at a mere $56 million. This imbalance undercut
U.S. neutrality. If Germany won and Britain and France
defaulted on their debts, American companies would
suffer catastrophic losses.

To  challenge  the  British  navy,  Germany  launched
a  devastating  new  weapon,  the  U-boat  (short  for
Unterseeboot, “undersea boat,” or submarine). In April
1915,  Germany  issued  a  warning  that  all  ships  flying
flags of Britain or its allies were liable to destruction. A
few weeks later, a U-boat torpedoed the British luxury
liner  Lusitania  off  the  coast  of  Ireland,  killing  1,198
people,  including  128  Americans.  The  attack  on  the
passenger ship (which was later revealed to have been
carrying munitions) incensed Americans. The follow-
ing year, in an agreement known as the Sussex pledge,
Germany agreed not to target passenger liners or mer-
chant ships unless an inspection showed the latter car-
ried  weapons.  But  the  Lusitania  sinking  prompted
Wilson to reconsider his options. After quietly trying
to  mediate  in  Europe  but  finding  neither  side  inter-
ested in peace, he endorsed a $1 billion U.S. military
buildup.

American public opinion still ran strongly against
entering the war, a fact that shaped the election of 1916.
Republicans rejected the belligerently prowar Theodore
Roosevelt  in  favor  of  Supreme  Court  justice  Charles
Evans Hughes, a progressive former governor of New
York.  Democrats  renominated  Wilson,  who  cam-
paigned  on  his  domestic  record  and  as  the  president
who “kept us out of war.” Wilson eked out a narrow vic-
tory;  winning  California  by  a  mere  4,000  votes,  he
secured a slim majority in the electoral college.

America Enters the War  Despite Wilson’s campaign
slogan,  events  pushed  him  toward  war.  In  February
1917, Germany resumed unrestricted submarine war-
fare, a decision dictated by the impasse on the Western
Front. In response, Wilson broke off diplomatic rela-
tions  with  Germany.  A  few  weeks  later,  newspapers
published  an  intercepted  dispatch  from  German  for-
eign secretary Arthur Zimmermann to his minister in
Mexico.  The  Zimmermann  tele-
gram  urged  Mexico  to  join  the
Central Powers, promising that if
the United States entered the war,
Germany  would  help  Mexico
recover  “the
lost  territory  of
Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona.”
With  Pancho  Villa’s  border  raids
still  fresh  in  Americans’  minds,

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors led the
United States to enter
World War I, despite
the desire of so many
Americans, including the
president, to stay out of
the war?

this threat jolted public opinion. Meanwhile, German
U-boats attacked U.S. ships without warning, sinking
three on March 18 alone.

On April 2, 1917, Wilson asked Congress for a dec-
laration of war. He argued that Germany had trampled
on American rights and imperiled U.S. trade and citi-
zens’ lives. “We desire no conquest,” Wilson declared,
“no material compensation for the sacrifices we shall
freely make.” Reflecting his progressive idealism, Wilson
promised that American involvement would make the
world  “safe  for  democracy.”  On  April  6,  the  United
States declared war on Germany. Reflecting the nation’s
divided  views,  the  vote  was  far  from  unanimous.  Six
senators and fifty members of the House voted against
entry,  including  Representative  Jeannette  Rankin  of
Montana,  the  first  woman  elected  to  Congress.  “You
can  no  more  win  a  war  than  you  can  win  an  earth-
quake,” Rankin said. “I want to stand by my country,
but I cannot vote for war.”

“Over There”
To  Americans,  Europe  seemed  a  great  distance  away.
Many assumed the United States would simply provide
munitions and economic aid. “Good Lord,” exclaimed
one  U.S.  senator  to  a  Wilson  administration  official,
“you’re not going to send soldiers over there, are you?”
But  when  General  John  J.  Pershing  asked  how  the
United States could best support the Allies, the French
commander put it bluntly: “Men, men, and more men.”
Amid war fever, thousands of young men prepared to
go  “over  there,”  in  the  words  of  George  M.  Cohan’s
popular  song:  “Make  your  Daddy  glad  to  have  had
such a lad. / Tell your sweetheart not to pine, / To be
proud her boy’s in line.”

Americans  Join  the  War
In  1917,  the  U.S.  Army
numbered fewer than 200,000 soldiers; needing more
men, Congress instituted a military draft in May 1917.
In contrast to the Civil War, when resistance was com-
mon, conscription went smoothly, partly because local,
civilian-run  draft  boards  played  a  central  role  in  the
new system. Still, draft registration demonstrated gov-
ernment’s increasing power over ordinary citizens. On
a  single  day — June  5,  1917 — more  than  9.5  million
men between the ages of twenty-one and thirty regis-
tered  at  local  voting  precincts  for  possible  military
service.

President Wilson chose General Pershing to head
the American Expeditionary Force (AEF), which had to
be trained, outfitted, and carried across the submarine-
plagued Atlantic. This required safer shipping. When

