CHAPTER 21

  An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918

687

Safe Sex, Vintage 1919

To teach young American men how to avoid
venereal diseases, the War Department used
posters, pep talks, and ﬁlms. There were no
effective treatments for venereal infections
until 1928, when Alexander Fleming discov-
ered penicillin, and so the army urged soldiers
to refrain from visiting prostitutes or to use
condoms. Fit to Win starred handsome Ray
McKee, who had already appeared in eighty
ﬁlms, and was directed by E. H. Grifﬁth, who
would go on to direct sixty Hollywood ﬁlms
between 1920 and 1946. Social Welfare History
Archives Center, University of Minnesota/Picture
Research Consultants & Archives.

the  United  States  entered  the  war,  German  U-boats
were sinking 900,000 tons of Allied ships each month.
By  sending  merchant  and  troop  ships  in  armed  con-
voys,  the  U.S.  Navy  cut  that  monthly  rate  to  400,000
tons by the end of 1917. With trench warfare grinding
on, Allied commanders pleaded for American soldiers
to fill their depleted units, but Pershing waited until the
AEF  reached  full  strength.  As  late  as  May  1918,  the
brunt of the fighting fell to the French and British.

The  Allies’  burden  increased  when  the  Eastern
Front collapsed following the Bolshevik (Communist)
Revolution  in  Russia  in  November  1917.  To  consoli-
date  power  at  home,  the  new  Bolshevik  government,
led by Vladimir Lenin, sought peace with the Central
Powers. In a 1918 treaty, Russia surrendered its claims
over vast parts of its territories in exchange for peace.
Released  from  war  against  Germany,  the  Bolsheviks
turned their attention to a civil war at home. Terrified
by  communism,  Japan  and  several  Allied  countries,
including  the  United  States,  later  sent  troops  to  fight
the Bolsheviks and aid forces loyal to the deposed tsar.
But after a four-year civil war, Lenin’s forces established
full  control  over  Russia  and  reclaimed  Ukraine  and
other former possessions.

Peace with Russia freed Germany to launch a major
offensive on the Western Front. By May 1918, German
troops  had  advanced  to  within  50  miles  of  Paris.
Pershing at last committed about 60,000 U.S. soldiers
to support the French defense. With American soldiers
engaged in massive numbers, Allied forces brought the
Germans to a halt in July; by September, they forced a
retreat.  Pershing  then  pitted  more  than  one  million

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did U.S. military entry
into World War I affect the
course of the war?

American soldiers against an out-
numbered and exhausted German
army  in  the  Argonne  forest.  By
early November, this attack broke
German defenses at a crucial rail
hub,  Sedan.  The  cost  was  high:
26,000  Americans  killed  and  95,000  wounded  (Map
21.3). But the flood of U.S. troops and supplies deter-
mined the outcome. Recognizing inevitable defeat and
facing popular uprisings at home, Germany signed an
armistice on November 11, 1918. The Great War was
over.

The American Fighting Force  By the end of World
War  I,  almost  4  million  American  men — popularly
known  as  “doughboys” — wore  U.S.  uniforms,  as  did
several thousand female nurses. The recruits reflected
America’s heterogeneity: one-fifth had been born out-
side  the  United  States,  and  soldiers  spoke  forty-nine
different  languages.  Though  ethnic  diversity  worried
some  observers,  most  predicted  that  military  service
would promote Americanization.

Over  400,000  African  American  men  enlisted,
accounting  for  13  percent  of  the  armed  forces.  Their
wartime experiences were often grim: serving in segre-
gated  units,  they  were  given  the  most  menial  tasks.
Racial  discrimination  hampered  military  efficiency
and  provoked  violence  at  several  camps.  The  worst
incident occurred in August 1917, when, after suffer-
ing a string of racial attacks, black members of the 24th
Infantry’s Third Battalion rioted in Houston, killing 15
white civilians and police officers. The army tried 118

