688

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

EN GL AN D
ThamesR.

London

North
Se a

NETHERLANDS

Dunkirk

Calais

Ypres

Brussels

BELGIUM

EnglishChannel

SommeR.

Amiens
Cantigny
May 1918

(cid:8)

SeineR.

Soissons

(cid:8)

Belleau Wood
June 1918

(cid:8)

MarneR.
Château-
Thierry
May 1918

Paris

Versailles

W

N

S

E

FR ANCE

R
h
i
n
e
R.

Cologne

GERMANY

Frankfurt

MoselleR.

Sedan

LUX.

Meuse-Argonne
Sept.–Nov. 1918

(cid:8)

SaarR.

Verdun

(cid:8)

St. Mihiel
Sept. 1918

Nancy

Strasbourg

R.
hine

R

MAP 21.3
U.S. Participation on the Western
Front, 1918

When American troops reached the
European front in signiﬁcant numbers
in 1918, the Allies and Central Powers
had been ﬁghting a deadly war of
attrition for almost four years. The
inﬂux of American troops and supplies
helped break the stalemate. Successful
offensive maneuvers by the American
Expeditionary Force included those at
Belleau Wood and Château-Thierry
and the Meuse-Argonne campaign.

(cid:8)

Major battles involving U.S. forces

Allied offensive

Territory under German control by July 1918

Line of trench warfare, 1915–1917

Armistice line, November 11, 1918

SWITZERLAND

0

0

50

100 miles

50

100 kilometers

of the soldiers in military courts for mutiny and riot,
hanged 19, and sentenced 63 to life in prison.

Unlike  African  Americans,  American  Indians
served  in  integrated  combat  units.  Racial  stereotypes
about Native Americans’ prowess as warriors enhanced
their military reputations, but it also prompted officers
to assign them hazardous duties as scouts and snipers.
About 13,000, or 25 percent, of the adult male Ameri-
can Indian population served during the war; roughly
5 percent died, compared to 2 percent for the military
as a whole.

Most American soldiers escaped the horrors of sus-
tained trench warfare. Still, during the brief period of
U.S.  participation,  over  50,000  servicemen  died  in
action;  another  63,000  died  from  disease,  mainly  the
devastating  influenza  pandemic  that  began  early  in
1918  and,  over  the  next  two  years,  killed  50  million
people worldwide. The nation’s military deaths, though
substantial, were only a tenth as many as the 500,000
American civilians who died of this terrible epidemic —
not to mention the staggering losses of Europeans in
the war (America Compared, p. 689).

War on the Home Front
In  the  United  States,  opponents  of  the  war  were  a
minority.  Helping  the  Allies  triggered  an  economic
boom  that  benefitted  farmers  and  working  people.

Many  progressives  also  supported  the  war,  hoping
Wilson’s  ideals  and  wartime  patriotism  would  renew
Americans’  attention  to  reform.  But  the  war  bitterly
disappointed them. Rather than enhancing democracy,
it chilled the political climate as government agencies
tried to enforce “100 percent loyalty.”

Mobilizing  the  Economy  American  businesses
made big bucks from World War I. As grain, weapons,
and manufactured goods flowed to Britain and France,
the United States became a creditor nation. Moreover,
as the war drained British financial reserves, U.S. banks
provided capital for investments around the globe.

Government  powers  expanded  during  wartime,
with new federal agencies overseeing almost every part
of  the  economy.  The  War  Industries  Board  (WIB),
established in July 1917, directed military production.
After a fumbling start that showed the limits of volun-
tarism,  the  Wilson  administration  reorganized  the
board and placed Bernard Baruch, a Wall Street finan-
cier  and  superb  administrator,  at  its  head.  Under  his
direction,  the  WIB  allocated  scarce  resources  among
industries, ordered factories to convert to war produc-
tion, set prices, and standardized procedures. Though
he could compel compliance, Baruch preferred to win
voluntary cooperation. A man of immense charm, he
usually  succeeded — helped  by  the  lucrative  military
contracts at his disposal. Despite higher taxes, corporate

