690

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Fighting the Flu

Inﬂuenza traversed the globe in 1918–1919, becoming a pandemic that killed as many as 50 million people.
According to recent research, the ﬂu began as a virus native to wild birds and then mutated into a form that
passed easily from one human to another. In the United States, one-ﬁfth of the population was infected and
more than 500,000 civilians died — ten times the number of American soldiers who died in combat during
World War I. The ﬂu virus spread with frightening speed, and the epidemic strained the resources of a U.S.
public health system already fully mobilized for the war effort. In October 1918 alone, 200,000 Americans
died. This photo shows doctors, army ofﬁcers, and reporters who donned surgical masks and gowns before
touring hospitals that treated inﬂuenza patients. © Bettmann/Corbis.

will win the war,” Hoover convinced farmers to nearly
double their acreage of grain. This increase allowed a
threefold rise in food exports to Europe. Among citi-
zens,  the  Food  Administration  mobilized  a  “spirit  of
self-denial”  rather  than  mandatory  rationing.  Female
volunteers went from door to door to persuade house-
keepers  to  observe  “Wheatless”  Mondays  and  “Pork-
less” Thursdays. Hoover, a Republican, emerged from
the  war  as  one  of  the  nation’s  most  admired  public
figures.

Promoting  National  Unity  Suppressing  wartime
dissent became a near obsession for President Wilson.
In April 1917, Wilson formed the Committee on Public

Information (CPI), a government propaganda agency
headed  by  journalist  George  Creel.  Professing  lofty
goals — educating citizens about democracy, assimilat-
ing  immigrants,  and  ending  the  isolation  of  rural
life — the  committee  set  out  to  mold  Americans  into
“one white-hot mass” of war patriotism. The CPI touched
the lives of nearly all civilians. It distributed seventy-
five million pieces of literature and enlisted thousands
of  volunteers — Four-Minute  Men — to  deliver  short
prowar speeches at movie theaters.

The  CPI  also  pressured  immigrant  groups  to
become  “One  Hundred  Percent  Americans.”  German
Americans bore the brunt of this campaign (Thinking
Like  a  Historian,  p.  692).  With  posters  exhorting

