CHAPTER 21

  An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918

691

Selling Liberty Bonds: Two Appeals

Once the United States entered the Great War, government ofﬁcials sought to enlist all Americans in the
battle against the Central Powers. They carefully crafted patriotic advertising campaigns that urged Americans
to buy bonds, conserve food, enlist in the military, and support the war effort in many other ways. One of
these posters appeals to recent immigrants, reminding them of their debt to American Liberty. The other
shows the overtly anti-German prejudices of many war appeals: it depicts the “Hun,” a slur for a German
soldier, with bloody hands and bayonet. Library of Congress.

citizens  to  root  out  German  spies,  a  spirit of  confor-
mity pervaded the home front. A quasi-vigilante group,
the  American  Protective  League,  mobilized  about
250,000 “agents,” furnished them with badges issued by
the  Justice  Department,  and  trained  them  to  spy  on
neighbors  and  coworkers.  In  1918,  members  of  the
league led violent raids against draft evaders and peace
activists.  Government  propaganda  helped  rouse  a
nativist hysteria that lingered into the 1920s.

Congress  also  passed  new  laws  to  curb  dissent.
Among them was the Sedition Act of 1918, which pro-
hibited any words or behavior that might “incite, pro-
voke, or encourage resistance to the United States, or
promote the cause of its enemies.” Because this and an
earlier  Espionage  Act  (1917)  defined  treason  loosely,
they  led  to  the  conviction  of  more  than  a  thousand

people. The  Justice  Department  prosecuted  members
of the Industrial Workers of the World, whose oppo-
sition  to  militarism  threatened  to  disrupt  war  pro-
duction of lumber and copper. When a Quaker pacifist
teacher  in  New  York  City  refused  to  teach  a  prowar
curriculum,  she  was  fired.  Socialist  Party  leader
Eugene V. Debs was sentenced to ten years in jail for
the crime of arguing that wealthy capitalists had started
the conflict and were forcing workers to fight.

Federal  courts  mostly  supported  the  acts.  In
Schenck  v.  United  States  (1919),  the  Supreme  Court
upheld the conviction of a socialist who was jailed for
circulating pamphlets that urged army draftees to resist
induction.  The  justices  followed  this  with  a  similar
decision in Abrams v. United States (1919), ruling that
authorities  could  prosecute  speech  they  believed  to

