T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

German Americans

in World War I

Before  1917,  Americans  expressed  diverse  opinions  about  the  war  in  Europe.
After the United States joined the Allies, however, German Americans’ loyalty
became  suspect.  German  immigrant  men  who  were  not  U.S.  citizens  were
required  to  register  as  “alien  enemies,”  and  government  propaganda  fueled
fear of alleged German spies. In April 1918 in Collinsville, Illinois, a German-born
socialist  named  Robert  Prager — who  had  sought  U.S.  citizenship  and  tried  to
enlist in the navy — was lynched by drunken miners. The documents below shed
light on German Americans’ wartime experiences.

1.  Advertisement, Fatherland, 1915. This ad appeared
in a political journal for German Americans. The
translation of the songs offered on this recording
are “Germany, Germany Above All” and “Precious
Homeland.”

Patriotic German Music on Columbia Double-Disc
Records

E2039

Deutschland, Deutschland über alles. . . .

10 in. — 75¢  Teure Heimat. . . .

COLUMBIA GRAMOPHONE COMPANY . . .
DEALERS EVERYWHERE.

2.  C. J. Hexamer, speech, Milwaukee, 1915. This

address by a German American community leader
was widely cited during a 1918 investigation by the
Senate Judiciary Committee.

Whoever casts his Germanism from him like an old glove,
is not worthy to be spit upon. . . . We have long suffered
the preachment that “you Germans must allow yourselves
to be assimilated, you must merge more in the American
people;” but no one will ever find us prepared to step
down to a lesser culture. No, we have made it our aim
to elevate the others to us. . . . Be strong, and German.
Remember, you German pioneers, that we are giving
to this people the best the earth affords, the benefits of
Germanic kultur.

3.  Sign in a Chicago park, 1917.

Chicago History Museum.

4.  “Lager Uber Alles” cartoon, 1918. This cartoon was
part of an Ohio Anti-Saloon League referendum
campaign to prohibit liquor sales. Ohio voters had
rejected such a measure in 1915 and 1917, but in
1918 a majority voted for prohibition. Many U.S.
breweries, such as Anheuser-Busch and Pabst, were
owned by German Americans. “Hun” was an epi-
thet for Germans; “Lager (Beer) Uber Alles” refers
to the German national anthem cited in source 1.

692

Courtesy of The Ohio State
University Department of
History.

