5.  James W. Gerard, radio address, 1917. Gerard was

U.S. ambassador to Great Britain.

The great majority of American citizens of German
descent have, in this great crisis in our history, shown
themselves splendidly loyal to our flag. Everyone has a
right to sympathize with any warring nation. But now
that we are in the war there are only two sides, and the
time has come when every citizen must declare himself
American — or traitor!

. . . The Foreign Minister of Germany once said to me

“. . . we have in your country 500,000 German reservists
who will rise in arms against your government if you dare
to make a move against Germany.” Well, I told him that
that might be so, but that we had 500,001 lampposts in
this country, and that that was where the reservists would
be hanging the day after they tried to rise. And if there are
any German-Americans here who are so ungrateful for all
the benefits they have received that they are still for the
Kaiser, there is only one thing to do with them. And that
is to hog-tie them, give them back the wooden shoes and
the rags they landed in, and ship them back. . . . There is
no animal that bites and kicks and squeals . . . equal to a
fat German-American, if you commenced to tie him up
and told him that he was on his way back to the Kaiser.

6.  Actions by New York liederkranz reported in New
Orleans Times-Picayune, May 16, 1918. Lieder-
kranz, or singing societies, played a vital role in
German immigrant communities. Before World
War I the city of Wheeling, West Virginia, counted
eleven such societies, with names like Harmonie,
Germania, and Mozart. By 1918 most liederkranz
had vanished. New York City’s was one of the few
that did not.

Members of the [New York] Liederkranz, an organiza-
tion founded seventy-one years ago by Germans . . . met
tonight and placed on record their unqualified Ameri-
canism.

 . . . They declared English the official language of the
organization, and for the first time in years the sound of
an enemy tongue will not be heard in the club’s halls.
Likewise they reiterated their offer to turn the buildings
over to the government as a hospital if it were necessary.

7.  Lola Gamble Clyde, 1976 interview on life in Idaho
during World War I. In the 1970s, historians inter-
viewed residents of rural Latah County, Idaho,
about their experiences in World War I. Frank

Brocke, a farmer, recalled that neighbors on their
joint telephone line would slam down the phone
when his mother or sister spoke German. “We had
to be so careful,” he said.

I remember when they smashed out store windows at
Uniontown that said [sauer]kraut. . . . Nobody would eat
kraut. Throw the Kraut out, they were Germans. . . . Even
the great Williamson store, he went in and gathered up
everything that was made in Germany, and had a big bon-
fire out in the middle of the street, you know. Although he
had many good German friends all over the county that
had helped make him rich. . . . And if it was a German
name — we’ll just change our name. . . . There were some
[German American] boys that got draft deferments. . . .
Some of them said that their fathers were sick and dying,
and their father had so much land they had to stay home
and farm it for them. . . . [Local men] tarred and feath-
ered some of them. Some of them as old men dying still
resented and remembered.

Sources: (1) Frederick C. Luebke, Bonds of Loyalty: German Americans and World
War I (Dekalb: Northern Illinois University Press, 1974), 109; (2) Hearings Before the
Subcommittee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, 65th Congress, Second Session
(Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1918), 300; (5) Gerard speech,
transcript and recording, at Library of Congress American Memory: memory.loc.gov
/ammem/nfhtml/nforSpeakers01.html; (6) New Orleans Times-Picayune, May 16, 1918;
(7) Oral histories of Idaho residents at GMU History Matters, historymatters.gmu
.edu/d/2/. Excerpt courtesy of Latah County Historical Society.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  How did conditions change for German Americans

between 1915 and 1918?

2.  According to these sources, what aspects of German

American culture did other Americans ﬁnd threatening?
What forms did anti-German hostility take?

3.  Compare the sources that offer a German American per-
spective (sources 1, 2, 6, and 7) to those that represent
a threat to German Americans’ way of life (3, 4, 5). How
did German Americans respond to growing anti-German
sentiment in this period?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

World War I heightened anxieties about who was a “true”
American. What groups were singled out in particular and
why? What continuities do you see between these fears
over “hyphenated” identities and controversies in earlier
eras of U.S. history? Today?

693

