694

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Great Migrations  World War I created tremendous
economic  opportunities  at  home.  Jobs  in  war  indus-
tries drew thousands of people to the cities. With so
many men in uniform, jobs in heavy industry opened
for  the  first  time  to  African  Americans,  accelerating
the  pace  of  black  migration  from  South  to  North.
During  World  War  I,  more  than  400,000  African
Americans moved to such cities as St. Louis, Chicago,
New York, and Detroit, in what became known as the
Great  Migration. The rewards were great, and taking
war  jobs  could  be  a  source  of  patriotic  pride.  “If  it
hadn’t been for the negro,” a Carnegie Steel manager
later  recalled,  “we  could  hardly  have  carried  on  our
operations.”

Blacks in the North encountered discrimination in
jobs, housing, and education. But in the first flush of
opportunity,  most  celebrated  their  escape  from  the
repressive racism and poverty of the South. “It is a mat-
ter of a dollar with me and I  feel that God made the
path and I am walking therein,” one woman reported
to  her  sister  back  home.  “Tell  your  husband  work  is
plentiful here.” “I just begin to feel like a man,” wrote
another  migrant  to  a  friend  in  Mississippi.  “My  chil-
dren are going to the same school with the whites. . . .
Will vote the next election and there isn’t any ‘yes sir’
and ‘no sir’ — it’s all yes and no and Sam and Bill.”

Wartime labor shortages prompted Mexican Amer-
i cans  in  the  Southwest  to  leave  farmwork  for  urban
industrial jobs. Continued political instability in Mex-
ico, combined with increased demand for farmworkers
in the United States, also encouraged more Mexicans
to move across the border. Between 1917 and 1920, at
least  100,000  Mexicans  entered  the  United  States;
despite discrimination, large numbers stayed. If asked
why, many might have echoed the words of an African
American man who left New Orleans for Chicago: they
were going “north for a better chance.” The same was
true for Puerto Ricans such as Jésus Colón, who also
confronted racism. “I came to New York to poor pay,
long hours, terrible working conditions, discrimination
even  in  the  slums  and  in  the  poor  paying  factories,”
Colón  recalled,  “where  the  bosses  very  dexterously
pitted Italians against Puerto Ricans and Puerto Ricans
against American Negroes and Jews.”

Women were the largest group to take advantage of
wartime  job  opportunities.  About  1  million  women
joined  the  paid  labor  force  for  the  first  time,  while
another  8  million  gave  up  low-wage  service  jobs  for
higher-paying  industrial  work.  Americans  soon  got
used to the sight of female streetcar conductors, train
engineers, and defense workers. Though most people
expected these jobs to return to men in peacetime, the

The Labor Agent in the South

This evocative painting from 1940 is part of the famous
Great Migration series by African American painter Jacob
Lawrence. It shows how many African American workers
found a route to opportunity: northern manufacturers,
facing severe wartime labor shortages, sent agents to the
South to recruit workers. Agents often arranged loans to
pay for train fare and other travel expenses; once laborers
were settled and employed in the North, they repaid the
loans from their wages. Here, a line of men waits for the
agent to record their names in his open ledger. The bare
tree in the background suggests the barrenness of eco-
nomic prospects for impoverished rural blacks in the
South; it also hints at the threat of lynching and racial
violence. Digital Image © The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed
by SCALA/Art Resource, NY.

pose  “a  clear  and  present  danger  to  the  safety  of  the
country.”  In  an  important  dissent,  however,  Justices
Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. and Louis Brandeis objected
to  the  Abrams  decision.  Holmes’s  probing  questions
about  the  definition  of  “clear  and  present  danger”
helped launch twentieth-century legal battles over free
speech and civil liberties.

