CHAPTER 21

  An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918

695

Women Riveters at the Puget Sound Navy Yard, 1919

With men at the front, women took many new jobs during World War I — as mail carriers, police ofﬁcers,
and farm laborers who joined the Women’s Land Army. African American women, generally limited by white
prejudice to jobs in domestic service and agriculture, found that the war opened up new opportunities and
better wages in industry. When the war ended, women usually lost jobs deemed to be men’s work. In 1919,
however, these women were still hard at work in the Puget Sound Navy Yard, near Seattle. What clues
indicate their attitudes toward their work, and toward one another? National Archives.

war created a new comfort level with women’s employ-
ment outside the home — and with women’s suffrage.

Women’s  Voting  Rights  The  National  American
Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) threw the sup-
port of its 2 million members wholeheartedly into the
war effort. Its president, Carrie Chapman Catt, declared
that women had to prove their patriotism to win the
ballot.  NAWSA  members  in  thousands  of  communi-
ties promoted food conservation and distributed emer-
gency  relief  through  organizations  such  as  the  Red
Cross.

Alice Paul and the National Woman’s Party (NWP)
took  a  more  confrontational  approach.  Paul  was  a
Quaker who had worked in the settlement movement
and  earned  a  PhD  in  political  science.  Finding  as  a
NAWSA lobbyist that congressmen dismissed her, Paul
founded the NWP in 1916. Inspired by militant British
suffragists, the group began in July 1917 to picket the

White  House.  Standing  silently  with  their  banners,
Paul and other NWP activists faced arrest for obstruct-
ing traffic and were sentenced to seven months in jail.
They  protested  by  going  on  a  hunger  strike,  which
prison authorities met with forced
feeding.  Pub lic  shock  at
the
women’s treatment drew attention
to the suffrage cause.

Impressed by NAWSA’s patri-
otism and worried by the NWP’s
militancy, the antisuffrage Wilson
reversed  his  position.  In  January
1918, he urged support for woman
suffrage  as  a  “war  measure.”  The
constitutional  amendment  quickly  passed  the  House
of  Representa tives;  it  took  eighteen  months  to  get
through  the  Senate  and  another  year  to  win  ratifi-
cation  by  the  states.  On  August  26,  1920,  when
Tennessee  voted  for  ratification,  the  Nineteenth

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What were the different
effects of African Ameri-
cans’, Mexican Americans’,
and women’s civilian
mobilization during World
War I?

