696

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Wagon Decorated for the Labor Day Parade, San Diego, California, 1910

As the woman suffrage movement grew stronger in the years before and during World War I, working-class
women played increasingly prominent and visible roles in its leadership. This Labor Day parade ﬂoat, created
by the Women’s Union Label League of San Diego, showed that activists championed equal pay for women
in the workplace as well as women’s voting rights. “Union Label Leagues” urged middle-class shoppers
to purchase only clothing with a union label, certifying that the item had been manufactured under safe
conditions and the workers who made it had received a fair wage. San Diego Historical Society, Title Insurance
Trust Collection.

Amendment became law. The state thus joined Texas
as one of two ex-Confederate states to ratify it. In most
parts  of  the  South,  the  measure  meant  that  white
women  began  to  vote:  in  this  Jim  Crow  era,  African
American  women’s  voting  rights  remained  restricted
along with men’s.

In  explaining  suffragists’  victory,  historians  have
debated  the  relative  effectiveness  of  Catt’s  patriotic
strategy and Paul’s militant protests. Both played a role
in persuading Wilson and Congress to act, but neither
might have worked without the extraordinary impact
of  the  Great  War.  Across  the  globe,  before  1914,  the
only places where women had full suffrage were New
Zealand, Australia, Finland, and Norway. After World
War  I,  many  nations  moved  to  enfranchise  women.
The new Soviet Union acted first, in 1917, with Great
Britain  and  Canada  following  in  1918;  by  1920,  the
measure  had  passed  in  Germany,  Austria,  Poland,
Czechoslovakia,  and  Hungary  as  well  as  the  United
States. (Major exceptions were France and Italy, where

women  did  not  gain  voting  rights  until  after  World
War  II,  and  Switzerland,  which  held  out  until  1971.)
Thus, while World War I introduced modern horrors
on the battlefield — machine guns and poison gas — it
brought  some  positive  results  at  home:  economic
opportunity and women’s political participation.

Catastrophe at Versailles
The idealistic Wilson argued that no victor should be
declared after World War I: only “peace among equals”
could last. Having won at an incredible price, Britain
and France showed zero interest in such a plan. But the
devastation wrought by the war created popular pres-
sure for a just and enduring outcome. Wilson scored a
diplomatic  victory  at  the  peace  conference,  held  at
Versailles, near Paris, in 1919, when the Allies chose to
base the talks on his  Fourteen  Points, a  blueprint for

