CHAPTER 21

  An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918

697

collective  military  action.  Wilson  hoped  the  League
would “end all wars.” But his ideals had marked limits,
and in negotiations he confronted harsh realities.

The Fate of Wilson’s Ideas
The peace conference included ten thousand represen-
tatives  from  around  the  globe,  but  leaders  of  France,
Britain, and the United States dominated the proceed-
ings. When the Japanese delegation proposed a decla-
ration for equal treatment of all races, the Allies rejected
it.  Similarly,  the  Allies  ignored  a  global  Pan-African
Congress,  organized  by  W.  E.  B.  Du  Bois  and  other
black leaders; they snubbed Arab representatives who
had  been  military  allies  during  the  war.  Even  Italy’s
prime minister — included among the influential “Big
Four,” because in 1915 Italy had switched to the Allied
side — withdrew  from  the  conference,  aggrieved  at
the way British and French leaders marginalized him.
The  Allies  excluded  two  key  players:  Russia,  because
they  distrusted  its  communist  leaders,  and  Germany,
because they planned to dictate terms to their defeated
foe. For Wilson’s “peace among equals,” it was a terrible
start.

Prime Minister David Lloyd George of Britain and
Premier Georges Clemenceau of France imposed harsh
punishments on Germany. Unbeknownst to others at
the time, they had already made secret agreements to
divide up Germany’s African colonies and take them as
spoils of war. At Versailles, they also forced the defeated
nation to pay $33 billion in reparations and surrender
coal  supplies,  merchant  ships,  valuable  patents,  and
even  territory  along  the  French  border.  These  terms
caused  keen  resentment  and  economic  hardship  in
Germany,  and  over  the  following  two  decades  they
helped lead to World War II.

Given these conditions, it is remarkable that Wilson
influenced the Treaty of Versailles as much as he did.
He intervened repeatedly to soften conditions imposed
on Germany. In accordance with the Fourteen Points,
he  worked  with  the  other  Allies  to  fashion  nine  new
nations, stretching from the Baltic to the Mediterranean
(Map 21.4). These were intended as a buffer to protect
Western Europe from communist Russia; the plan also
embodied Wilson’s principle of self-determination for
European  states.  Elsewhere  in  the  world,  the  Allies
dismantled  their  enemies’  empires  but  did  not  create
independent nations, keeping colonized people subor-
dinate to European power. France, for example, refused
to give up its long-standing occupation of Indochina;
Clemenceau’s snub of future Vietnamese leader Ho Chi
Minh,  who  sought  representation  at  Versailles,  had

“Peace and Future Cannon Fodder”

This scathing cartoon, published in 1920, was drawn by
Australian-born artist Will Dyson and published in a British
magazine. It shows the “Big Four” power brokers at Ver-
sailles — from left to right, Vittorio Orlando of Italy, David
Lloyd George of Britain, Georges Clemenceau of France, and
Woodrow Wilson of the United States. Clemenceau, who was
nicknamed “The Tiger,” turns his head and comments on the
crying child. Even at the time, astute observers such as Dyson
argued that the treaty might have horriﬁc consequences,
particularly in the brutal conditions it imposed on Germany.
Dyson sketched “1940 Class” over the head of the child. The
young children of 1920 grew up to inherit the consequences
of the Versailles treaty, which contributed to the rise of
fascism, Nazism, and World War II. British Daily Herald,
May 13, 1919.

peace that he had presented a year earlier in a speech to
Congress.

Wilson’s  Points  embodied  an  important  strand
in  progressivism.  They  called  for  open  diplomacy;
“absolute freedom of navigation upon the seas”; arms
reduction; removal of trade barriers; and national self-
determination  for  peoples  in  the  Austro-Hungarian,
Russian,  and  German  empires.  Essential  to  Wilson’s
vision was the creation of an international regulatory
body,  eventually  called  the  League  of  Nations,  that
would  guarantee  each  country’s  “independence  and
territorial  integrity.”  The  League  would  mediate  dis-
putes, supervise arms reduction, and — according to its
crucial  Article  X — curb  aggressor  nations  through

