698

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
In what ways did the
Treaty of Versailles
embody — or fail to
embody — Wilson’s
Fourteen Points?

grave long-term consequences for
both France and the United States.
The establishment of a British
mandate in Palestine (now Israel)
also  proved  crucial.  During  the
war,  Brit ish  foreign  secretary  Sir
Arthur Balfour had stated that his
country  would  work  to  establish
there a “national home for the Jewish people,” with the
condition that “nothing shall be done which may prej-
udice  the  civil  and  religious  rights  of  existing  non-
Jewish  communities  in  Palestine.”  Under  the  British
mandate,  thousands  of  Jews  moved  to  Palestine  and
purchased  land,  in  some  cases  evicting  Palestinian
tenants. As early as 1920, riots erupted between Jews
and Palestinians — a situation that, even before World
War II, escalated beyond British control.

The  Versailles  treaty  thus  created  conditions  for
horrific future bloodshed, and it must be judged one of
history’s great catastrophes. Balfour astutely described
Clemenceau, Lloyd George, and Wilson as “all-powerful,
all-ignorant  men,  sitting  there  and  carving  up  conti-
nents.”  Wilson,  however,  remained  optimistic  as  he
returned home, even though his health was beginning
to fail. The president hoped the new League of Nations,
authorized  by  the  treaty,  would  moderate  the  settle-
ment and secure peaceful resolutions of other disputes.
For this to occur, U.S. participation was crucial.

Congress Rejects the Treaty
The  outlook  for  U.S.  ratification  was  not  promising.
Though major opinion makers and religious denomi-
nations supported the treaty, openly hostile Republicans

AY
W
R
O
N

N
E
D
E
W
S

FINLAND

ESTONIA

LATVIA

New and reconstituted
nations
Demilitarized or Allied
occupation

British mandates

French mandates

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

A T L A N T I C
O C E A N

IRELAND

N

E

W

S

a
Se
Baltic

(cid:2)

LITHUANIA
EAST
PRUSSIA
(Ger.)

POLAND

North
Sea

DENMARK

NETHERLANDS

UNITED
KINGDOM

BELG.

LUXEMBOURG

LORRAINE
ALSACE

SWITZ.

FRANCE

Danzig
(Free City)

GERMANY
RHINELAND
SAAR

CZECH.

AUST.

HUNG.

L
A
G
U
T
R
O
P

SPAIN

Corsica
(Fr.)

ROMANIA

BULG.

YUGOSLAVIA

AdriaticSea
ITALY

ALB.

GREECE

Sardinia
(It.)

Sicily

Black Sea

TURKEY

M e d i t e r r a n e a n   S e a

TUNISIA
(Fr.)

Crete

DODECANESE IS.
(Italy)

PALESTINE

ALGERIA
(Fr.)

N O R T H   A F R I C A

LIBYA
(It.)

EGYPT
(independent 1922)

S O V I E T   U N I O N

VolgaR.

Caspian

Se
a

PERSIA

Persian
Gulf

SYRIA

IRAQ

TRANS-
JORDAN

KUWAIT
(Gr. Br.)

SAUDI ARABIA

MAP 21.4
Europe and the Middle East After World War I

World War I and its aftermath dramatically altered the landscape of Europe and the Middle East.
In central Europe, the collapse of the German, Russian, and Austro-Hungarian empires brought
the reconstitution of Poland and the creation of a string of new states based on the principle of
national (ethnic) self-determination. The demise of the Ottoman Empire resulted in the appearance
of the quasi-independent territories, or “mandates,” of Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine. The
League of Nations stipulated that their affairs would be supervised by one of the Allied powers.

