CHAPTER 21

  An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918

699

held  a  majority  in  the  Senate.  One  group,  called  the
“irreconcilables,”  consisted  of  western  progressive
Repub  licans such as Hiram Johnson of California and
Robert  La  Follette  of  Wisconsin,  who  opposed  U.S.
involvement in European affairs. Another group, led by
Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts, worried
that Article X — the provision for collective security —
would prevent the United States from pursuing an inde-
pendent foreign policy. Was the nation, Lodge asked,
“willing to have the youth of America ordered to war”
by  an  international  body?  Wilson  refused  to  accept
any amendments, especially to placate Lodge, a hated
rival.  “I  shall  consent  to  nothing,”  the  president  told
the  French  ambassador.  “The  Senate  must  take  its
medicine.”

To  mobilize  support,  Wilson  embarked  on  an
exhausting speaking tour. His impassioned defense of
the League of Nations brought audiences to tears, but
the strain proved too much for the president. While vis-
iting Colorado in September 1919, Wilson collapsed. A
week later, back in Washington, he suffered a stroke that
left one side of his body paralyzed. Wilson still urged
Democratic  senators  to  reject  all  Republican  amend-
ments. When the treaty came up for a vote in November
1919, it failed to win the required two-thirds majority. A
second attempt, in March 1920, fell seven votes short.

The  treaty  was  dead,  and  so  was  Wilson’s  leader-
ship.  The  president  never  fully  recovered  from  his
stroke. During the last eighteen months of his adminis-
tration, the government drifted as Wilson’s physician,
his wife, and various cabinet heads secretly took charge.
The United States never ratified the Versailles treaty or
joined the League of Nations. In turn, the League was
weak. When Wilson died in 1924, his dream of a just
and peaceful international order lay in ruins.

The  impact  of  World  War  I  can  hardly  be  over-
stated. Despite bids for power by Britain and France,
Europe’s hold on its colonial empires never recovered.
The United States, now a major world power, appeared
to  turn  its  back  on  the  world  when  it  rejected  the
Versailles treaty. But in laying claim to Hawaii and the
Philippines,  asserting  power  in  Latin  America,  and
intervening  in  Asia,  the  United  States  had  entangled
itself deeply in global politics. By 1918, the nation had
gained  too  much  diplomatic  clout — and  was  too
dependent  on  overseas  trade — for  isolation  to  be  a
realistic long-term option.

On  the  home  front,  the  effects  of  World  War  I
were  no  less  dramatic.  Wartime  jobs  and  prosperity
ushered in an era of exuberant consumerism, while the

achievements of women’s voting rights seemed to pre-
sage  a  new  progressive  era.  But  as  peace  returned,  it
became  clear  that  the  war  had  not  advanced  reform.
Rather than embracing government activism, Ameri-
cans of the 1920s proved eager to relinquish it.

SUMMARY
Between  1877  and  1918,  the  United  States  rose  as  a
major economic and military power. Justifications for
overseas expansion emphasized access to global mar-
kets,  the  importance  of  sea  power,  and  the  need  to
police international misconduct and trade. These justi-
fications shaped U.S. policy toward European powers
in  Latin  America,  and  victory  in  the  War  of  1898
enabled  the  United  States  to  take  control  of  former
Spanish colonies in the Caribbean and Pacific. Victory,
however, also led to bloody conflict in the Philippines
as  the  United  States  struggled  to  suppress  Filipino
resistance to American rule.

After 1899, the United States aggressively asserted
its interests in Asia and Latin America. In China, the
United  States  used  the  so-called  Boxer  Rebellion  to
make good its claim to an “open door” to Chinese mar-
kets. Later, President Theodore Roosevelt strengthened
relations with Japan, and his successor, William Howard
Taft, supported U.S. business interests in China. In the
Caribbean, the United States constructed the Panama
Canal and regularly exercised the right, claimed under
the  Roosevelt  Corollary,  to  intervene  in  the  affairs  of
states in the region. President Woodrow Wilson pub-
licly disparaged the imperialism of his predecessors but
repeatedly used the U.S. military to “police” Mexico.

At the outbreak of World War I, the United States
asserted neutrality, but its economic ties to the Allies
rapidly undercut that claim. In 1917, German subma-
rine attacks drew the United States into the war on the
side of Britain and France. Involvement in the war pro-
foundly transformed the economy, politics, and society
of  the  nation,  resulting  in  an  economic  boom,  mass
migrations  of  workers  to  industrial  centers,  and  the
achievement  of  national  voting  rights.  At  the  Paris
Peace Conference, Wilson attempted to implement his
Fourteen Points. However, the designs of the Allies in
Europe  undermined  the  Treaty  of  Versailles,  while
Republican resistance at home prevented ratification of
the treaty. Although Wilson’s dream of a just interna-
tional order failed, the United States had taken its place
as a major world power.

