700

PART 7

  CHAPTER REVIEW

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

American exceptionalism (p. 674)
“Remember the Maine” (p. 675)
Teller Amendment (p. 675)
Insular Cases (p. 678)
Platt Amendment (p. 678)
open door policy (p. 679)
Root-Takahira Agreement

(p. 682)

Panama Canal (p. 682)
Roosevelt Corollary (p. 683)
Zimmermann telegram (p. 686)
War Industries Board (p. 688)

National War Labor Board

(p. 689)

Committee on Public Informa-

tion (p. 690)

Four-Minute Men (p. 690)
Sedition Act of 1918 (p. 691)
Great Migration (p. 694)
National Woman’s Party (p. 695)
Fourteen Points (p. 696)
League of Nations (p. 697)
Treaty of Versailles (p. 697)

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

Key People

Theodore Roosevelt (p. 674)
Alfred Mahan (p. 674)
Queen Liliuokalani (p. 676)
Emilio Aguinaldo (p. 678)
Porfirio Díaz (p. 683)
Woodrow Wilson (p. 683)
Herbert Hoover (p. 689)
Alice Paul (p. 695)

1.  What factors prompted the United States to claim
overseas territories in the 1890s and early 1900s?

2.  What role did the United States play in World War
I? On balance, do you think U.S. entry into the war
was justified? Why or why not?

3.  How did World War I shape America on the home

front, economically and politically?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events listed under “America in the World” on the
thematic timeline on page 671. By the end of World
War I, what influence did the United States exercise
in  the  Caribbean,  Latin  America,  the  Pacific,  and
China, and in European affairs? How, and to what
extent, had its power in each region expanded over
the previous four decades? Compare and contrast
the  role  of  the  United  States  to  the  roles  of  other
powers in each region.

