CHAPTER 21

  CHAPTER REVIEW

701

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  Read  again  the
documents from “Representing Indians” in Chap-
ter 16 (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 530). In what
ways  might  ideas  about  Native  Americans  have
informed  attitudes  toward  Hawaiians,  Filipinos,
and other people of color overseas? How might this
explain which peoples Woodrow Wilson included
and excluded in his ideal of “national self-determina-
tion”? Write a short essay in which you explain how
Americans’  policies  and  attitudes  toward  native
peoples within North America shaped U.S. foreign
policy between 1898 and 1918. You may also wish
to review relevant information in Chapters 15 and
20  and  consider  how  attitudes  toward  African

Americans shaped white Americans’ racial assump-
tions in this era.

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  Review  the  images  on
pages 673, 685, and 695. What do they tell us about
how the 1910s, especially the experiences of World
War  I,  changed  gender  expectations  for  men  and
women? At the start of the war, would you rather
have been a young man or a young woman? Why?
How  did  new  opportunities  vary  according  to  a
young person’s race and ethnicity? (The posters on
pp. 687 and 691 may also be useful in considering
this question.)

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Jean H. Baker, Votes for Women (2002). A collection of
essays on the achievement of women’s suffrage.

Frank Freidel, Over There (1990). A collection of
American soldiers’ firsthand accounts of their experi-
ences in World War I.

Julie Greene, The Canal Builders (2009). The story of
the Panama Canal through the viewpoint of the
diverse workers who constructed it.

James R. Grossman, Land of Hope (1999). A sweeping
study of the Great Migration.

The Great War and the Shaping of the 20th Century.
An excellent PBS documentary with accompanying
documents at pbs.org/greatwar/index.html.

Walter LaFeber, The American Search for Opportunity,
1865–1913 (1993). An excellent, up-to-date synthesis
of foreign policy in this era.

