Cultural Conflict,
Bubble, and Bust
1919–1932

Rising  to  fame  in  The  Sheik  (1922),

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
What conflicts in culture and politics
arose in the 1920s, and how did eco-
nomic developments in that decade
help cause the Great Depression?

Rudolph  Valentino  became  a  con-
troversial  Hollywood  star.  Calling
him “dark, darling, and delightful,” female
fans mobbed his appearances. In Chicago,
Mexican American boys slicked back their
hair and called each other “sheik.” But some Anglo men said they loathed Valentino.
One reviewer claimed the star had stolen his style from female “vamps” and ridiculed
him for wearing a bracelet (a gift from his wife). The Chicago Tribune blamed Valentino
for the rise of “effeminate men,” shown by the popularity of “ﬂoppy pants and slave
bracelets.” Outraged, Valentino challenged the journalist to a ﬁght — and defeated the
writer’s stand-in.

Valentino, an Italian immigrant, upset racial and ethnic boundaries. Nicknamed the
Latin Lover, he played among other roles a Spanish bullﬁghter and the son of a maha-
rajah. When a reporter called his character in The Sheik a “savage,” Valentino retorted,
“People are not savages because they have dark skins. The Arab civilization is one of the
oldest in the world.”

But  to  many  American-born  Protestants,  movies  were  morally  dangerous — “vile
and atrocious,” one women’s group declared. The appeal of “dark” stars like Valentino
and his predecessor, Japanese American actor Sessue Hayakawa, was part of the prob-
lem. Hollywood became a focal point for political conﬂict as the nation took a sharp
right turn. A year before The Sheik appeared, the Reverend Wilbur Crafts published a
widely reprinted article warning of “Jewish Supremacy in Film.” He accused “Hebrew”
Hollywood executives of “gross immorality” and claimed they were racially incapable of
understanding  “the  prevailing  standards  of  the  American  people.”  These  were  not
fringe views. Crafts’s editorial ﬁrst appeared in a newspaper owned by prominent auto-
maker Henry Ford.

Critics, though, failed to slow Hollywood’s success. Faced with threats of regulation,
movie-makers did what other big businesses did in the 1920s: they used their clout to
block government intervention. At the same time, they expanded into world markets;
when Valentino visited Paris, he was swarmed by thousands of French fans. The Sheik
highlighted  America’s  business  success  and  its  political  and  cultural  divides.  Young
urban  audiences,  including  women  “ﬂappers,”  were  eager  to  challenge  older  sexual
and religious mores. Rural Protestants saw American values going down the drain. In
Washington,  meanwhile,  Republican  leaders  abandoned  two  decades  of  reform  and
deferred to business. Americans wanted prosperity, not progressivism — until the conse-
quences arrived in the shock of the Great Depression.

22

C H A P T E R

CONFLICTED LEGACIES
OF WORLD WAR I

Racial Strife

Erosion of Labor Rights

The Red Scare

POLITICS IN THE 1920s

Women in Politics

Republicans and Business

Dollar Diplomacy

Culture Wars

INTELLECTUAL
MODERNISM
Harlem in Vogue

Critiquing American Life

FROM BOOM TO BUST

The Postwar Economy

Consumer Culture

The Coming of the Great

Depression

704

