706

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Conflicted Legacies
of World War I
“The World War has accentuated all our differences,” a
journalist observed in 1919. “It  has not created those
differences, but it has revealed and emphasized them.”
In the war’s immediate aftermath, thousands of strikes
revealed continuing labor tensions. Violent riots exposed
white  resistance  to  the  rising  expectations  of  African
Americans, while an obsessive hunt for “foreign” radi-
cals — like  angry  denunciations  of  Hollywood’s  Latin
Lover — showed that ethnic pluralism would not win
easy acceptance.

Racial Strife
African Americans emerged from World War I deter-
mined to achieve citizenship rights. Millions had loy-
ally  supported  the  war  effort;  350,000  had  served  in
uniform. At the same time, the Great Migration drew
hundreds  of  thousands  from  the  South  to  northern
industrial cities, where they secured good wartime jobs
and found they could vote and use their new economic

clout  to  build  community  institutions  and  work  for
racial justice. The black man, one observer wrote, “real-
ized  that  he  was  part  and  parcel  of  the  great  army
of democracy. . . . With this realization came the con-
sciousness of pride in himself as a man, and an Amer-
ican citizen.”

These developments sparked white violence. In the
South, the number of lynchings rose from 48 in 1917 to
78  in  1919,  including  several  murders  of  returning
black soldiers in their military uniforms. In 1921, after
a  brutal  lynching  in  the  railroad  town  of  Rosewood,
Florida,  black  residents  armed  for  self-defense;  mobs
of  furious  whites  responded  by  torching  houses  and
hunting  down  African  Americans.  Police  and  state
authorities refused to intervene. The town of Rosewood
vanished from the map.

In  northern  and  midwestern  cities,  the  arrival  of
southern  migrants  deepened  existing  racial  tensions.
Blacks competed with whites — including recent immi-
grants — for scarce housing and jobs. Unionized white
workers resented blacks who served as strikebreakers.
Racism  turned  such  conflicts  into  violent  confron-
tations.  Attacks  on  African  Americans  broke  out  in
more than twenty-five cities. One of the deadliest riots

Chicago Race Riot

When racial violence exploded in Chicago during
the summer of 1919, Chicago Evening Post pho-
tographer Jun Fujita was on the scene to capture it.
As one of the few Japanese immigrants in Chicago
at the time, Fujita was probably no stranger to rac-
ism, and it took personal courage to put himself in
the midst of the escalating violence. When the riot
ﬁnally ended, thirty-eight people were dead and
more than ﬁve hundred were injured. Chicago
Historical Society/Photo by Jun Fujita.

