CHAPTER 22

  Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932

707

occurred in 1917 in East St. Louis, Illinois, where nine
whites  and  more  than  forty  blacks  died.  Chicago
endured five days of rioting in July 1919. By September,
the national death toll from racial violence reached 120.
The oil boomtown of Tulsa, Oklahoma, was the site
of  a  horrific  incident  in  June  1921.  Sensational,  false
reports  of  an  alleged  rape  helped  incite  white  mobs
who resented growing black prosperity. Anger focused
on the 8,000 residents of Tulsa’s prosperous Greenwood
district, locally known as “the black Wall Street.” The
mob — helped  by  National  Guardsmen,  who  arrested
blacks  who  resisted — burned  thirty-five  blocks  of
Greenwood and killed several dozen people. The city’s
leading  paper  acknowledged  that  “semi-organized
bands  of  white  men  systematically  applied  the  torch,
while  others  shot  on  sight  men  of  color.”  It  took  a
decade for black residents to rebuild Greenwood.

Erosion of Labor Rights
African Americans were not the only ones who faced
challenges  to  their  hard-won  gains.  The  war  effort,
overseen by a Democratic administration sympathetic
to labor, had temporarily increased the size and power
of  labor  unions.  The  National  War  Labor  Board  had
instituted a series of prolabor measures, including rec-
ognition of workers’ right to organize. Membership in
the  American  Federation  of  Labor  (AFL)  grew  by  a
third during World War I, reaching more than 3 mil-
lion  by  war’s  end,  and  continued  to  climb  afterward.
Workers’  expectations  also  rose  as  the  war  economy
brought higher pay and better working conditions.

But  when  workers  tried  to  maintain  these  stan-
dards  after  the  war,  employers  cut  wages  and  rooted
out unions, prompting massive confrontations. In 1919,
more than four million wage laborers — one in every
five — went on strike, a proportion never since equaled.
A  walkout  of  shipyard  workers  in  Seattle  sparked  a
general strike that shut down the city. Another strike
disrupted  the  steel  industry,  as  350,000  workers
demanded  union  recognition  and  an  end  to  twelve-
hour shifts. Elbert H. Gary, head of United States Steel
Corporation,  refused  to  negotiate;  he  hired  Mexican
and  African  American  replacements  and  broke  the
strike. Meanwhile, business leaders in rising industries,
such  as  automobile  manufacturing,  resisted  unions,
creating more and more nonunionized jobs.

Public  employees  fared  no  better.  Late  in  1919,
Boston’s police force demanded a union and went on
strike to get it. Massachusetts governor Calvin Coolidge
won national fame by declaring, “There is no right to
strike against the public safety by anybody, anywhere,

Fear of “Bolshevism,” 1919

This cartoon from the Post Dispatch in Cleveland, Ohio,
reﬂects nationwide panic over the general strike by 110
unions that paralyzed Seattle in February 1919. Opponents
of radical labor unrest had a deeper fear: the Bolshevik
Revolution in Russia, resulting in creation of the USSR, had
brought into existence the world’s ﬁrst enduring communist
state. By crushing unions in Seattle with a club of “Law and
Order,” this image suggests that Uncle Sam could beat back
the global communist threat. This aspect of the 1919 Red
Scare preﬁgured, at an early date, the anxieties of the Cold
War era. Ohio Historical Society.

anytime.”  Coolidge  fired  the  entire  police  force;  the
strike  failed.  A  majority  of  the  public  supported  the
governor. Republi cans rewarded Coolidge by nominat-
ing him for the vice-presidency in 1920.

Antilabor decisions by the Supreme Court were an
additional key factor in unions’ decline. In Coronado
Coal  Company  v.  United  Mine
Work ers  (1925),  the  Court  ruled
that  a  striking  union  could  be
penalized
illegal  restraint
of  trade.  The  Court  also  struck
down  federal  legislation  regulat-
ing child labor; in Adkins v. Child-
ren’s  Hospital  (1923),  it  voided
a  minimum  wage  for  women

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What factors contributed
to antiblack violence, labor
defeats, and the Red Scare,
and what connections
might we draw among
these events?

for

