708

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

workers in the District of Columbia, reversing many of
the gains that had been achieved through the ground-
breaking  decision  in  Muller  v.  Oregon  (Chap ter  20).
Such decisions, along with aggressive antiunion cam-
paigns, caused membership in labor unions to fall from
5.1 million in 1920 to 3.6 million in 1929 — just 10 per-
cent of the nonagricultural workforce.

In place of unions, the 1920s marked the heyday of
welfare  capitalism,  a  system  of  labor  relations  that
stressed  management’s  responsibility  for  employees’
well-being.  Automaker  Henry  Ford,  among  others,
pioneered  this  system  before  World  War  I,  famously
paying $5 a day. Ford also offered a profit-sharing plan
to  employees  who  met  the  standards  of  its  Social
Department, which investigated to ensure that work-
ers’ private lives met the company’s moral standards. At
a  time  when  government  unemployment  compensa-
tion and Social Security did not exist, General Electric
and U.S. Steel provided health insurance and old-age
pensions.  Other  employers,  like  Chicago’s  Western
Electric  Company,  built  athletic  facilities  and  selec-
tively  offered  paid  vacations.  Employers  hoped  this
would  build  a  loyal  workforce  and  head  off  labor
unrest. But such plans covered only about 5 percent of
the  industrial  workforce.  Facing  new  financial  pres-
sures  in  the  1920s,  even  Henry  Ford  cut  back  his  $5
day. In the tangible benefits it offered workers, welfare
capitalism had serious limitations.

The Red Scare
Many  well-off  Americans  sided  with  management  in
the upheavals of the postwar years. They blamed work-
ers for the rapidly rising cost of living, which jumped
nearly 80 percent between 1917 and 1919. The socialist
views  of  some  recent  immigrants  frightened  native-
born  citizens;  communism  terrified  them.  When  in
1919 the Soviet Union’s new Bolshevik leaders founded
the Third International, intended to foster revolutions
abroad, some Americans began to fear that dangerous
radicals  were  hiding  everywhere.  Wartime  hatred  of
Germans was replaced by hostility toward Bolsheviks
(labeled  “Reds,”  after  the  color  of  communist  flags).
Ironically, American communists remained few in num-
ber and had little political influence. Of the 50 million
adults  in  the  United  States  in  1920,  no  more  than
70,000 belonged to either the fledgling U.S. Communist
Party or the Communist Labor Party.

In April 1919, alert postal workers discovered and
defused thirty-four mail bombs addressed to govern-
ment officials. In June, a bomb detonated outside the
Washington town house of recently appointed attorney

The Passion of Sacco and Vanzetti, by Ben Shahn,
1931–1932

Ben Shahn (1898–1969) came to the United States from Lith-
u ania as a child and achieved fame as a social realist painter
and photographer. Shahn used his art to advance his belief
in social justice. In this painting, Sacco and Vanzetti lie dead
and pale, hovered over by three distinguished Massa chus etts
citizens. These grim-faced men — holding lilies, a symbol of
death — are Harvard University president A. Lawrence Lowell
and the two other members of a commission appointed by
the governor in 1927 to review the case. The commission
concluded that the men were guilty, a ﬁnding that led to their
execution. Judge Webster Thayer, who presided at the origi-
nal trial in 1921, stands in the window in the background.
The Passion of Sacco and Vanzetti by Ben Shahn (1931–1932)
Art © Estate of Ben Shahn/Licensed by VAGA, New York, NY.
Photo © Geoffrey Clements.

general A. Mitchell Palmer. Palmer escaped unharmed,
but he used the incident to fan public fears, precipitat-
ing  a  hysterical  Red  Scare.  With  President  Woodrow
Wilson  incapacitated  by  stroke,  Palmer  had  a  free

