CHAPTER 22

  Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932

709

hand. He set up an antiradicalism division in the Justice
Department  and  appointed  his  assistant  J.  Edgar
Hoover  to  direct  it;  shortly  afterward,  it  became  the
Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  (FBI).  In  November
1919, Palmer’s agents stormed the headquarters of rad-
ical organizations. The dragnet captured thousands of
aliens  who  had  committed  no  crimes  but  who  held
anarchist or revolutionary beliefs. Lacking the protec-
tion of U.S. citizenship, many were deported without
indictment or trial.

The  Palmer  raids  peaked  on  a  notorious  night  in
January 1920, when federal agents invaded homes and
meeting halls, arrested six thousand citizens and aliens,
and denied the prisoners access to legal counsel. Then
Palmer, who had presidential ambitions, overreached.
He predicted that on May 1 a radical conspiracy would
attempt to overthrow the U.S. government. State mili-
tia and police went on twenty-four-hour alert to guard
against  the  alleged  threat,  but  not  a  single  incident
occurred. As the summer of 1920 passed without major
strikes or renewed bombings, the Red Scare began to
abate.

Like  other  postwar  legacies,  however,  antiradical-
ism had broad, long-lasting effects. In May 1920, at the
height of the Red Scare, police arrested Nicola Sacco, a
shoemaker,  and  Bartolomeo  Vanzetti,  a  fish  peddler,
for the murder of two men during a robbery of a shoe
company in South Braintree, Massachusetts. Sacco and
Vanzetti were Italian aliens and self-proclaimed anar-
chists who had evaded the draft. Convicted of the mur-
ders, Sacco and Vanzetti sat in jail for six years while
supporters  appealed  their  verdicts.  In  1927,  Judge
Webster  Thayer  denied  a  motion  for  a  new  trial  and
sentenced  them  to  death.  Scholars  still  debate  their
guilt or innocence. But the case was clearly biased by
prosecutors’ emphasis on their ties to radical groups.
The  execution  of  Sacco  and  Vanzetti  was  one  of  the
ugly scars left by the ethnic and political hostilities of
the Great War.

Politics in the 1920s
As the plight of labor suggested, the 1920s were a tough
decade for progressives who had gained ground before
World War I. After a few early reform victories, includ-
ing  achievement  of  national  women’s  suffrage,  the
dominant motif of the 1920s was limited government.
Native-born white Protestants rallied against what they
saw  as  big-city  values  and  advocated  such  goals  as
immigration restriction. A series of Republican presi-
dents placed responsibility for the nation’s well-being

in  the  hands  of  business.  President  Calvin  Coolidge
declared,  “The  man  who  builds  a  factory  builds  a
temple. The man who works there worships there.” The
same theme prevailed in continued U.S. interventions
in  Latin  America  and  elsewhere:  American  business
needs were the top priority.

Women in Politics
At the start of the 1920s, many progressives hoped the
attainment of women’s voting rights would offer new
leverage to tackle poverty. They created organizations
like  the  Women’s  Joint  Congressional  Committee,  a
Washington-based  advocacy  group.  The  committee’s
greatest accomplishment was the first federally funded
health-care  legislation,  the  Sheppard-Towner  Federal
Maternity  and  Infancy  Act  (1921).  Sheppard-Towner
provided  federal  funds  for  medical  clinics,  prenatal
education  programs,  and  visiting  nurses.  Though
opponents warned that the act would lead to socialized
medicine, Sheppard-Towner improved health care for
the  poor  and  significantly  lowered  infant  mortality
rates. It also marked the first time that Congress desig-
nated federal funds for the states to encourage them to
administer a social welfare program.
In  1923,  Alice  Paul,  founder
of  the  National  Woman’s  Party,
also persuaded congressional allies
to  consider  an  Equal  Rights
Amend ment  (ERA)  to  the  U.S.
Consti tution.  It  stated  simply,
“men and women shall have equal
rights  throughout  the  United
States.”  Advocates  were  hopeful;
Wiscon sin  had  passed  a  similar
law two years earlier, and it helped
women  fight  gender  discrimina-
tion.  But  opponents  pointed  out  that  the ERA would
threaten recent labor laws that protected women from
workplace abuses. Such laws recognized women’s vul-
nerable place in a heavily sex-segregated labor market.
Would a theoretical statement of “equality” help poor
and  working  women  more  than  existing  protections
did?  This  question  divided  women’s  rights  advocates.
Introduced  repeatedly  in  Congress  over  the  next  five
decades  but  rarely  making  it  out  of  committee,  the
ERA was debated again and again until the bitter ratifi-
cation struggle of the 1970s (Chapter 29).

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
Before World War I,
women didn’t have full
voting rights, but they had
considerable success as
reformers. After the war
they could vote, but their
proposals met defeat. How
might we account for this
apparent contradiction?

Horrified at the suffering caused by World War I,
some  women  joined  a  growing  international  peace
movement. While diplomats conducted negotiations at
Versailles,  women  peace  advocates  from  around  the

