710

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Such women faced serious opposition. The WILPF
came under fierce attack during the Red Scare because
it included socialist women in its ranks. And though
women proved to be effective lobbyists, they had diffi-
culty gaining access to positions inside the Republican
and Democratic parties. Finding that women did not
vote as a bloc, politicians in both parties began to take
their votes for granted. New reforms failed to gain sup-
port, and others were rolled back. Many congressmen,
for example, had supported the Sheppard-Towner Act
because  they  feared  the  voting  power  of  women,  but
Congress ended the program in the late 1920s.

Republicans and Business
With President Wilson ailing in 1920, Democrats nom-
inated Ohio governor James M. Cox for president, on a
platform calling for U.S. participation in the League of
Nations  and  continuation  of  Wilson’s  progressivism.
Republicans,  led  by  their  probusiness  wing,  tapped
genial  Ohio  senator  Warren  G.  Harding.  In  a  dig  at
Wilson’s  idealism,  Harding  promised  “not  nostrums
but normalcy.” On election day, he won in a landslide,
beginning an era of Republican dominance that lasted
until 1932.

Harding’s  most  energetic  appointee  was  Secretary
of Commerce Herbert Hoover, well known as head of
the  wartime  Food  Administration.  Under  Hoover’s
direction,  the  Commerce  Department  helped  create
two thousand trade associations representing compa-
nies in almost every major industry. Government offi-
cials  worked  closely  with  the  associations,  providing
statistical  research,  suggesting  industry-wide  stan-
dards, and promoting stable prices and wages. Hoover
hoped  that  through  voluntary  business  cooperation
with  government — an  associated  state — he  could
achieve what progressives had sought through govern-
mental regulation. This meant, of course, giving corpo-
rate leaders greater policymaking power.

More sinister links between government and cor-
porate  interests  were  soon  revealed.  When  President
Harding  died  suddenly  of  a  heart  attack  in  August
1923,  evidence  was  just  emerging  that  parts  of  his
administration  were  riddled  with  corruption.  The
worst scandal concerned secret leasing of government
oil reserves in Teapot Dome, Wyoming, and Elk Hills,
California,  to  private  companies.  Secretary  of  the
Interior Albert Fall was eventually convicted of taking
$300,000 in bribes and became the first cabinet officer
in U.S. history to serve a prison sentence.

Vice President Calvin Coolidge became  president
upon  Harding’s  death.  He  maintained  Republican

The League of Women Voters

The League of Women Voters was the brainchild of Carrie
Chapman Catt, president of the National American Woman
Suffrage Association. Formed in 1920, as the Nineteenth
Amendment was about to give women the vote, the league
undertook to educate Americans in responsible citizenship
and to win enactment of legislation favorable to women. The
league helped secure passage of the Sheppard-Towner Act of
1921, which provided federal aid for maternal and child-care
programs. In the 1930s, members campaigned for the enact-
ment of Social Security and other social welfare legislation.
The Library of Virginia

world convened in Zurich and called on all nations to
use their resources to end hunger and promote human
welfare.  Treaty  negotiators  ignored  them,  but  the
women organized for sustained activism. In 1919, they
created  the  Women’s  International  League  for  Peace
and  Freedom  (WILPF),  whose  leading  American
members  included  Jane  Addams.  Members  of  the
league  denounced  imperialism,  stressed  the  human
suffering  caused  by  militarism,  and  proposed  social
justice measures.

