CHAPTER 22

  Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932

711

dominance  while  offering,  with  his  austere  Yankee
morality,  a  contrast  to  his  predecessor’s  cronyism.
Campaigning  for  election  in  his  own  right  in  1924,
Coolidge  called  for  limited  government  and  tax  cuts
for  business.  Rural  and  urban  Democrats,  deeply
divided over such issues as prohibition and immigra-
tion restriction, deadlocked at their national conven-
tion;  after  102  ballots,  delegates  finally  nominated
John  W.  Davis,  a  Wall  Street  lawyer.  Coolidge  easily
defeated Davis and staved off a challenge from Senator
Robert M. La Follette of Wisconsin, who tried to resus-
citate the Progressive Party. The 1924 Progressive plat-
form  called  for  stronger  government  regulation  at
home and international efforts to reduce weapons pro-
duction and prevent war. “Free men of every genera-
tion,” it declared, “must combat the renewed efforts of
organized  force  and  greed.”  In  the  end,  Coolidge
received 15.7 million votes to Davis’s 8.4 million and La
Follette’s 4.9 million.

To see a longer excerpt of the Progressive Party
platform, along with other primary sources from
this period, see Sources for America’s History.

For  the  most  part,  Republicans  dropped  progres-
sive initiatives of the prewar years. The Federal Trade
Commission  failed  to  enforce  antitrust  laws.  The
Supreme  Court,  now  headed  by  former  Republican
president  William  Howard  Taft,  refused  to  break  up
the mammoth U.S. Steel Corporation, despite evidence
of its near-monopoly status. With the agricultural sec-
tor  facing  hardship,  Congress  sought  to  aid  farmers
with the McNary-Haugen bills of 1927 and 1928, which
proposed a system of federal price supports for major
crops.  But  President  Coolidge  opposed  the  bills  as
“special-interest  legislation”  and  vetoed  them  both.
While some state and municipal leaders continued to
pursue ambitious agendas, they were shut out of fed-
eral power.

Dollar Diplomacy
Political campaigns emphasized domestic issues in the
1920s, but while the United States refused to join the
League  of  Nations,  the  federal  government  remained
deeply engaged in foreign affairs. Republican presidents
worked to advance U.S. business interests, especially by
encouraging private banks to make foreign loans — part
of the broader government-business alliance in Repub-
licans’ associated state. Policymakers hoped loans would
stimulate growth and increase demand for U.S. prod-
ucts in developing markets. Bankers, though, wanted

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
What choices did Ameri-
cans face in the elections
of 1920 and 1924, and
what directions did they
choose?

government guarantees of repay-
ment in countries they perceived
as weak or unstable.

Officials provided such assur-
ance. In 1922, for example, when
American  banks  offered  an
immense  loan  to  Bolivia  (at  a
hefty  profit),  State  Department
officials pressured the South American nation to accept
it. Diplomats also forced Bolivia to agree to financial
oversight by a commission under the banks’ control. A
similar  arrangement  was  reached  with  El  Salvador’s
government in 1923. In other cases, the United States
intervened militarily, often to force repayment of debt.
To implement such policies, the U.S. Marines occupied
Nicaragua almost continuously from 1912 to 1933, the
Dominican  Republic  from  1916  to  1924,  and  Haiti
from 1915 to 1934.

In these lengthy military deployments, Americans
came to think of the occupied countries as essentially
U.S.  possessions,  much  like  Puerto  Rico  and  the
Philippines. Sensational memoirs by marines who had
served in Haiti popularized the island as the “American
Africa.” White Americans became fascinated by vodou
(voodoo)  and  other  Haitian  religious  customs,  rein-
forcing their view of Haitians as dangerous savages or
childlike people who needed U.S. guidance and super-
vision.  One  commander  testified  that  his  troops  saw
themselves as “trustees of a huge estate that belonged to
minors. . . . The Haitians were our wards.”

At  home,  critics  denounced  loan  guarantees  and
military  interventions  as  dollar  diplomacy.  The  term
was coined in 1924 by Samuel Guy Inman, a Disciples
of  Christ  missionary  who  toured  U.S.-occupied  Haiti
and  the  Dominican  Republic.  “The  United  States,”
Inman declared, “cannot go on destroying with impu-
nity the sovereignty of other peoples, however weak.”
African American leaders also denounced the Haitian
occupation.  On  behalf  of  the  Women’s  International
League  for  Peace  and  Freedom  and  the  International
Council of Women of the Darker Races, a delegation
conducted  a  fact-finding  tour  of  Haiti  in  1926.  Their
report exposed, among other things, the sexual exploi-
tation of Haitian women by U.S. soldiers.

By  the  late  1920s,  dollar  diplomacy  was  on  the
defensive, in keeping with a broader disgust over inter-
national affairs. At the same time,
leaders  became  frus-
political
trated  with  their  poor  results.
Dollar  diplomacy  usually  man-
aged to get loans repaid, securing
bankers’  profits.  But  the  loans

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What were the economic
goals of U.S. foreign
policy makers in the 1920s?

