712

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

often ended up in the pockets of local elites; U.S. poli-
cies  failed  to  build  broad-based  prosperity  overseas.
Military intervention had even worse results. In Haiti,
for example, the marines crushed peasant protests and
helped the Haitian elite consolidate power. U.S. occupa-
tion thus helped create the conditions for harsh dicta-
torships that Hait ians endured through the rest of the
twentieth century.

Culture Wars
By  1929,  ninety-three  U.S.  cities  had  populations  of
more than 100,000. New York City’s population exceeded
7  million;  Los  Angeles’s  had  exploded  to  1.2  million.
The lives and beliefs of urban Americans often differed
dramatically  from  those  in  small  towns  and  farming
areas. Native-born rural Protestants, faced with a dire
perceived  threat,  rallied  in  the  1920s  to  protect  what
they saw as American values.

Prohibition  Rural  and  native-born  Protestants
started the decade with the achievement of a longtime
goal:  national  prohibition  of  liquor  (Chapter  18).
Wartime  anti-German  prejudice  was  a  major  spur.
Since  breweries  like  Pabst  and  Anheuser-Busch  were
owned by German Americans, many citizens decided
it was unpatriotic to drink beer. Mobilizing the econ-
omy  for  war,  Congress  also  limited  brewers’  and

distillers’ use of barley and other scarce grains, causing
consumption to decline. The decades-long prohibition
campaign  culminated  with  Congress’s  passage  of  the
Eighteenth Amendment in 1917. Ratified over the next
two  years  by  nearly  every  state  and  taking  effect  in
January  1920,  the  amendment  prohibited  “manufac-
ture,  sale,  or  transportation  of  intoxicating  liquors”
anywhere in the United States.

Defenders hailed prohibition as a victory for health,
morals, and Christian values. In urban areas, though,
thousands flagrantly ignored the law. Patrons flocked
to  urban  speakeasies,  or  illegal  drinking  sites,  which
flourished in almost every Chicago neighborhood; one
raid on a South Side speakeasy yielded 200,000 gallons
of alcohol. Profits from the secret clubs enriched noto-
rious gangsters such as Chicago’s Al Capone and New
York’s Jack Diamond.

In  California,  Arizona,  and  Texas,  tens  of  thou-
sands  of  Americans  streamed  “south  of  the  border.”
Mexico  regulated  liquor  but  kept  it  legal  (along  with
gambling, drugs, and prostitution), leading to the rise
of booming vice towns such as Tijuana and Mexicali,
places that had been virtually uninhabited before 1900.
U.S.  nightclub  owners  in  these  cities  included  such
prominent  figures  as  African  American  boxer  Jack
Johnson. By 1928, the American investors who built a
$10  million  resort,  racetrack,  and  casino  in  Tijuana
became known as border barons. Prohibitionists were

Wine in the Gutters,
Brooklyn

This photograph captures
America’s cultural conﬂicts over
prohibition. When the law went
into effect, federal agents seized
and destroyed supplies of alcohol,
often dumping it in the streets.
Here, working-class children in
Brooklyn race to scoop it up in
buckets before it drains away.
In tenement neighborhoods,
children eager to earn a nickel
often toted buckets of beer, wine,
and homemade liquor for their
parents or neighbors. How might
a rural temperance advocate have
responded to this photograph?
How about a working-class man
in Chicago, Atlanta, Seattle, or
New York? Picture Research
Consultants & Archives.

