CHAPTER 22

  Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932

713

outraged  by  Americans’  circumventions  of  the  law.
Religious leaders on both sides of the border denounced
illegal drinking — but profits were staggering. The dif-
ficulties  of  enforcing  prohibition  contributed  to  its
repeal in 1933 (Chapter 23).

Evolution  in  the  Schools  At  the  state  and  local
levels, controversy erupted as fundamentalist Protestants
sought to mandate school curricula based on the bibli-
cal account of creation. In 1925, Tennessee’s legislature
outlawed  the  teaching  of  “any  theory  that  denies  the
story  of  the  Divine  creation  of  man  as  taught  in  the
Bible,  [and  teaches]  instead  that  man  has  descended
from  a  lower  order  of  animals.”  The  American  Civil
Liberties Union (ACLU), formed during the Red Scare
to protect free speech rights, challenged the law’s con-
stitutionality.  The  ACLU  intervened  in  the  trial  of
John  T.  Scopes,  a  high  school  biology  teacher  who
taught the theory of evolution to his class and faced a
jail sentence for doing so. The case attracted national
attention because Clarence Darrow, a famous criminal
lawyer, defended Scopes, while William Jennings Bryan,
the three-time Democratic presidential candidate, spoke
for the prosecution.

Journalists  dubbed  the  Scopes  trial  “the  monkey
trial.”  This  label  referred  both  to  Darwin’s  argument
that  human  beings  and  other  primates  share  a  com-
mon ancestor and to the circus atmosphere at the trial,
which was broadcast live over a Chicago radio station.
(Proving that urbanites had their own prejudices, acer-
bic critic H. L. Mencken dismissed antievolutionists as
“gaping primates of the upland valleys,” implying that
they had not evolved.) The jury took only eight min-
utes to deliver its verdict: guilty. Though the Tennessee
Supreme  Court  later  overturned  Scopes’s  conviction,
the  law  remained  on  the  books  for  more  than  thirty
years.

Nativism  Some  native-born  Protestants  pointed  to
immigration as the primary cause of what they saw as
America’s  moral  decline.  A  nation  of  105  million
people  had  added  more  than  23  million  immigrants
over  the  previous  four  decades;  the  newcomers
included many Catholics and Jews from Southern and
Eastern  Europe,  whom  one  Maryland  congressman
referred  to  as  “indigestible  lumps”  in  the  “national
stomach.” Such attitudes recalled hostility toward Irish
and Germans in the 1840s and 1850s. In this case, they
fueled  a  momentous  shift  in  immigration  policy.
“Amer ica must be kept American,” President Coolidge
declared  in  1924.  Congress  had  banned  Chinese
immigration  in  1882,  and  Theodore  Roosevelt  had

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did debates over
alcohol use, the teaching
of evolution, immigration,
anti-Semitism, and racism
evolve in the 1920s?

negotiated a so-called gentleman’s
agreement  that  limited  Japanese
immigration in 1907. Now nativ-
ists  charged  that  there  were  also
too many Euro pean arrivals, some
of  whom  undermined  Protes-
tantism and imported anarchism,
socialism, and other radical doc-
trines.  Respond ing  to  this  pressure,  Congress  passed
emergency immigration restrictions in 1921 and a per-
manent measure three years later. The National Origins
Act  (1924)  used  backdated  census  data  to  establish  a
baseline: in the future, annual immigration from each
country could not exceed 2 percent of that nationality’s
percentage  of  the  U.S.  population  as  it  had  stood  in
1890.  Since  only  small  numbers  of  Italians,  Greeks,
Poles,  Russians,  and  other  Southern  and  Eastern
European  immigrants  had  arrived  before  1890,  the
law drastically limited immigration from those places.
In  1929,  Congress  imposed  even  more  restrictive
quotas,  setting  a  cap  of  150,000  immigrants  per  year
from Europe and continuing to ban most immigrants
from Asia.

The  new  laws,  however,  permitted  unrestricted
immigration  from  the  Western  Hemisphere.  As  a
result, Latin Americans arrived in increasing numbers,
finding jobs in the West that had gone to other immi-
grants before exclusion. More than 1 million Mexicans
entered  the  United  States  between  1900  and  1930,
including many during World War I. Nativists lobbied
Congress  to  cut  this  flow;  so  did  labor  leaders,  who
argued that impoverished migrants lowered wages for
other  American  workers.  But  Congress  heeded  the
pleas  of  employers,  especially  farmers  in  Texas  and
California,  who  wanted  cheap  labor.  Only  the  Great
Depression cut off migration from Mexico.

Other  anti-immigrant  measures  emerged  at  the
state  level.  In  1913,  by  an  overwhelming  majority,
California’s legislature had passed a law declaring that
“aliens  ineligible  to  citizenship”  could  not  own  “real
property.” The aim was to discourage Asians, especially
Japanese immigrants, from owning land, though some
had lived in the state for decades and built up prosper-
ous farms. In the wake of World War I, California tight-
ened  these  laws,  making  it  increasingly  difficult  for
Asian  families  to  establish  themselves.  California,
Washington,  and  Hawaii  also  severely  restricted  any
school  that  taught  Japanese  language,  history,  or  cul-
ture. Denied both citizenship and land rights, Japanese
Americans  would  be  in  a  vulnerable  position  at  the
outbreak of World War II, when anti-Japanese hysteria
swept the United States.

