714

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

The U.S. Border Patrol, Laredo, Texas, 1926

In 1926, San Antonio photographer Eugene O. Goldbeck took this photograph of U.S. Border Patrol ofﬁ-
cers in Laredo. Since 1917, Mexicans, like other immigrants, had been subject to a head tax and literacy test.
The U.S. government had not enforced these provisions, however, because of pressure from southwestern
employers eager for cheap Mexican labor. Following passage of the National Origins Act in 1924, the United
States established the Border Patrol. Its increasing efforts to police the border slowed the casual movement
of Mexican workers in and out of the United States. Why do you think the Border Patrol posed in this way
for Goldbeck’s picture? Notice that some of the ofﬁcers depicted here were dressed as civilians. What might
this signify? Harry Ransom Center, University of Texas at Austin.

The  National  Klan  The  1920s  brought  a  nation-
wide resurgence of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), the white
supremacist  group  formed  in  the  post–Civil  War
South.  Soon  after  the  premiere  of  Birth  of  a  Nation
(1915), a popular film glorifying the Reconstruction-
era Klan, a group of southerners gathered on Georgia’s
Stone  Mountain  to  revive  the  group.  With  its  blunt
motto, “Native, white, Protestant supremacy,” the Klan
recruited supporters across the country (Thinking Like
a Historian, p. 716). KKK members did not limit their
immigrants,
harassment
Catholics, and Jews as well, with physical intimidation,
arson, and economic boycotts.

to  blacks  but

targeted

At the height of its power, the Klan wielded serious
political  clout  and  counted  more  than  three  million
members,  including  many  women.  The  Klan’s  main-
stream  appeal  was  illustrated  by  President  Woodrow
Wilson’s public praise for Birth of a Nation. Though the
Klan declined nationally after 1925, robbed of a potent
issue  by  passage  of  the  anti-immigration  bill,  it
remained  strong  in  the  South,  and  pockets  of  KKK
activity persisted in all parts of the country (Map 22.1).
Klan activism lent a menacing cast to political issues.
Some  local  Klansmen,  for  example,  cooperated  with

members of the Anti-Saloon League to enforce prohi-
bition laws through threats and violent attacks.

The rise of the Klan was part of an ugly trend that
began before World War I and extended into the 1930s.
In 1915, for example, rising anti-Semitism was marked
by the lynching of Leo Frank, a Jewish factory supervi-
sor in Marietta, Georgia, who was wrongly accused of
the  rape  and  murder  of  a  thirteen-year-old  girl.  The
rise  of  the  national  Klan  helped  prepare  the  way  for
white supremacist movements of the 1930s, such as the
Los Angeles–based Silver Legion, a fringe paramilitary
group aligned with Hitler’s Nazis. Far more influential
were  major  figures  such  as  industrialist  Henry  Ford,
whose Dearborn Independent railed against immigrants
and warned that members of “the proud Gentile race”
must arm themselves against a Jewish conspiracy aimed
at world domination. Challenged by critics, Ford issued
an  apology  in  1927  and  admitted  that  his  allegations
had been based on “gross forgeries.” But with his paper’s
editorials  widely  circulated  by  the  Klan  and  other
groups, considerable long-term damage had been done.

The  Election  of  1928  Conflicts  over  race,  reli-
gion,  and  ethnicity  created  the  climate  for  a  stormy

