CHAPTER 22

  Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932

715

C A N A D A

WASH.

OREGON
(cid:6)
(cid:2)

IDAHO

MONTANA

NORTH
DAKOTA

MINN.

SOUTH
DAKOTA

WIS.
(cid:2)

MICH.

WYOMING

NEBRASKA

IOWA
(cid:6)

NEVADA

UTAH

CALIF.
(cid:2)

COLORADO
(cid:6) (cid:6)

(cid:2)

KANSAS
(cid:2)

MO.

ARIZONA

NEW
MEXICO

OKLAHOMA
(cid:6) (cid:6)

ARK.

PACIFIC
OCE AN

TEXAS
(cid:6)
(cid:8)

LA.
(cid:8)

PA.
(cid:8)

VA.

N.C.
(cid:8)

(cid:6) (cid:6)
IND.
(cid:6)
(cid:2)

ILL.
(cid:8)

OHIO
(cid:6)
(cid:2)
(cid:8)

W.
VA.

KY.
(cid:6)

TENN.
(cid:6)
(cid:2)

S.C.

GA.
(cid:2)
(cid:8)

MISS.

ALA.
(cid:2)
(cid:8)

FLA.
(cid:8)

ME.
(cid:2)

VT.

N.H.
(cid:8)

N.Y.

MASS.

R.I.
CONN.

N.J.

(cid:8)

DEL.
MD.

N

W

E

S

A T L A N T I C
O C E A N

(cid:2)
(cid:6)
(cid:8)

Governor elected with Klan support

U.S. senator elected with Klan support

M E X I C O

Major areas of Klan violence

Gulf of Mexico

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

MAP 22.1
Ku Klux Klan Politics and Violence in the 1920s

Unlike the Reconstruction-era Klan, the Klan of the 1920s was geographically dispersed and had
substantial strength in the West and Midwest as well as in the South. Although the Klan is often
thought of as a rural movement, some of the strongest “klaverns” were in Chicago, Los Angeles,
Atlanta, Detroit, and other large cities. The organization’s members operated as vigilantes in areas
where they were strong; elsewhere, their aggressive tactics triggered riots between Klansmen and
their ethnic and religious targets.

presidential  election  in  1928.  Democrats  had  tradi-
tionally drawn strength from white voters in the South
and immigrants in the North: groups that divided over
prohibition, immigration restriction, and the Klan. By
1928,  the  northern  urban  wing  gained  firm  control.
Democrats  nominated  Governor  Al  Smith  of  New
York, the first presidential candidate to reflect the aspi-
rations of the urban working class. A grandson of Irish
peasants,  Smith  had  risen  through  New  York  City’s
Democratic machine to become a dynamic reformer.
But he offended many small-town and rural Americans
with his heavy New York accent and brown derby hat,
which  highlighted  his  ethnic  working-class  origins.
Middle-class reformers questioned his ties to Tammany
Hall;  temperance  advocates  opposed  him  as  a  “wet.”
But the governor’s greatest handicap was his religion.

Although Smith insisted that his Catholic beliefs would
not  affect  his  duties  as  president,  many  Protestants
opposed  him.  “No  Governor  can  kiss  the  papal  ring
and  get  within  gunshot  of  the  White  House,”  vowed
one Methodist bishop.

Smith proved no match for the Republican nomi-
nee,  Secretary  of  Commerce  Herbert  Hoover,  who
embodied  the  technological  promise  of  the  modern
age. Women who had mobilized for Hoover’s  conser-
vation  campaigns  during  World  War  I  enlisted  as
Hoover  Hostesses,  inviting  friends  to  their  homes  to
hear  the  candidate’s  radio  speeches.  Riding  on  eight
years of Republican prosperity, Hoover promised that
individualism and voluntary cooperation would ban-
ish  poverty.  He  won  overwhelmingly,  with  444  elec-
toral  votes  to  Smith’s  87  (Map  22.2).  Because  many

