T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Who Joined the

Ku Klux Klan?

Asked  why  a  person  would  join  the  Klan,  you  might  cite  racism  and  religious
bigotry. But the story is complicated: many whites with strong prejudices did not
join the Klan in the 1920s, while others did. Why?

1.  Klan wedding in Washington, D.C., 1925.

Source: Getty Images

2.  Poem read at a meeting of KKK Grand Dragons,

North Carolina, 1923.

God Give Us Men! The Invisible Empire demands

strong

Minds, great hearts, true faith and ready hands . . .
Men who possess opinions and a will;
Men who have honor; men who will not lie;
Men who can stand before a demagogue and damn
his treacherous flattering without winking! . . .
Men of dependable character; men of sterling worth;
Then wrongs will be redressed, and right will rule the

earth.

3.  “95% of Bootleggers Jews,” editorial, Dearborn

Independent, Michigan, 1922.

Violation and evasion of the Prohibition laws has had a
deep Jewish complexion from the very beginning. . . .
This does not mean, of course, that every bootlegger is a
Jew. Unless you live in Chicago, New York or other large
cities, an actual meeting with the Jew in this minor capac-
ity will not be frequent. The Jew is the possessor of the
wholesale stocks; . . .  But notwithstanding all this care-
fulness, the bulk of the arrests made in the United States
have been among Jews. . . . The maintenance of the idea
of drink in the minds of the people is due to Jewish

716

propaganda. . . . The idea of drink will be maintained by
means of the Jewish stage, Jewish jazz, and the Jewish
comics, until somebody comes down hard upon it.

4.  Report on a Klan gathering in Birmingham,

Alabama, 1923.

Edgewood Park was crowded by noon. Klansmen and
their wives and families enjoyed a great barbecue, went
swimming, dancing, and picknicking. There were air-
plane stunts during the day with band concerts thrown
in for good measure. At night there was a wonderful
display of fireworks following the initiation and the
address of the Imperial Wizard.

5.  Klansmen in Buffalo, New York, 1924. Data based
on historical research into a Klan membership list
of almost 2,000 men in the Buffalo area.

TABLE 22.1

Klansmen in Buffalo, New York, 1924

Percentage of
Total Native
White Male
Workers in
Buffalo

Percentage
of KKK
Members

  6.1

  4.7

18.5

27.7

10.4

22.6

30.6

25.3

16.4

  0.5

30.2

14.5

Occupational Group

Professional (predomi-
nantly clergy, doctors,
engineers, pharmacists)

Business (small
businessmen, managers,
inspectors, accountants)

Low nonmanual (sales-
men, clerks, foremen)

Skilled (machinists, electri-
cians, railroad engineers,
construction trades)

Semiskilled and service
(factory and rail workers,
deliverymen, policemen,
repairmen)

Unskilled (laborers,
gardeners)

