6.  Interviews conducted in the 1980s with Indiana

Klanswomen about Klan life in the 1920s. Seeking
truthful accounts, the interviewer allowed the
women to remain anonymous.

Anonymous

For [the Klan] to say, we want to get rid of the niggers,
we want to get rid of the Catholics, it didn’t mean a thing
to us. . . . I can remember quite well the stories that you
hear sitting on the porch. . . .  They’d talk about religion,
and they’d talk about Catholics. . . . The Catholics were
considered horrible people. . . .

Anonymous

Kelly had a grocery store. Well, it hurt their business ter-
ribly because people wouldn’t go in there, because the Klan
would tell you not to. . . . If you had a empty house . . . ,
why you were told not to rent it to a Catholic.

Some Klan leader said that the Pope was coming to
take over the country, and he said he might be on the next
train that went through North Manchester. You know, just
trying to make it specific. So, about a thousand people went
out to the train station and stopped the train. It only had . . .
one passenger on it. They took him off, and he finally con-
vinced them that he wasn’t the Pope. He was a carpet
salesman. And so they put him on the next train and
he went on to Chicago.

7.  Editorial by National Imperial Wizard Hiram

Wesley Evans in the KKK periodical Dawn: A Jour-
nal for True American Patriots, November 10, 1923.

Humanity has become a commodity. For mercenary
motives, our importers of it want the most inferior grade.
Industry desires cheap labor. Therefore, we have had this
recent flood of 5 and 10-cent citizenship. Take any map
which shows the concentration of the South and Eastern
European type of immigrant and you will see [that]
wherever manufacturing and mining and lumbering
predominate, there the hordes of unskilled labor have
overwhelmingly been assembled. . . .

The present and recent flood of inferior foreigners has

vastly increased our illiteracy, vitally lowered the health
level and visibly menaced America by inheritable mental
and moral deficiencies. . . . [Farms are] the only legiti-
mate and justifiable excuse for cheap labor, yet that class
is moving irresistibly cityward to swell the slums and
multiply immorality. For example, throughout the south
the colored race . . . is migrating to the North — not to
its rural districts, but to its industrial centers.

8.  “Program for America,” in the KKK newspaper

American Standard, April 15, 1925.

(cid:114) Laws to require the reading of the Holy Bible in every
American public school.

(cid:114) Recognition of the fact . . . that Romanism is working
here to undermine Americanism. . . . Since Roman Cath-
olics give first allegiance to an alien political potentate,
the pope . . . their claim to citizenship, to the ballot, and
to public office in this Protestant country is illegitimate,
and must be forbidden by law. . . .

(cid:114) A law to destroy the alien influence of the foreign lan-
guage press [by] requiring that the English language be
used exclusively.

(cid:114) . . . Recognition of the tendency toward moral disintegra-
tion, resulting from the activities . . . of the anti-Christian
Jews, in our theaters, our motion pictures, and in American
business circles; the discontinuance of these anti-Christian
activities, and the exclusion of Jews of this character from
America.

(cid:114) The return of the Negroes to their homeland of Africa,
under the protection and with the help of the United
States Government.

(cid:114) Strict adherence to the Constitution of the United States,
including the Prohibition Amendment, by every citizen.

Sources: (2) Kelly J. Baker, Gospel According to the Klan (Lawrence: University Press of
Kansas, 2011), 119; (3) Dearborn Independent editorial reprinted in Aspects of Jewish
Power in the United States (Dearborn, MI: Dearborn Publishing, 1922), 34–40; (4) Rory
McVeigh, The Rise of the Ku Klux Klan (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
2009), 150; (5) Shawn Lay, Hooded Knights on the Niagara (New York: New York
University Press, 1995), chapter 4 (esp. 87); (6) Kathleen M. Blee, Women in the Klan
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1991), 78–79, 149–151;
(7) McVeigh, 64–65; (8) American Standard, April 15, 1925, 172.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Based on the documents above, identify factors that
made the KKK appealing to some Americans in the
1920s.

2.  Which groups in source 5 were over- and underrepre-
sented in the Klan? The same historian found that at
least 34 percent of local Klan members were German
American. Review the Thinking Like a Historian feature
in Chapter 21, page 692. Why might Germans have been
especially likely to join the Klan in this period?

3.  What are the advantages and limitations of source 6?
4.  Imagine that Republican president Calvin Coolidge had
set up a federal agency to discourage KKK activity (an
action he did NOT take). He put you in charge of the
effort and gave you a generous budget. How would
you have spent the funds? Explain why you believe your
strategy might have been effective.

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Using your knowledge of Chapter 22, and drawing on
evidence from the documents above, write a brief essay
explaining how the rise of the KKK in the 1920s reﬂected
larger patterns in American society and politics.

717

