718

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

7

5

4

4

3

3

4

13

3

3

5

5

8

12

13

6

10

18

10

20

9

10

13

15

45

29 15

24

8

13

12

10 12

14

38

12

12

9

6

6

44

18

5
7
14
3
8

Harlem in Vogue
The Great Migration tripled New York’s black popula-
tion  in  the  decade  after  1910.  Harlem  stood  as  “the
symbol of liberty and the Promised Land to Negroes
everywhere,”  as  one  minister  put  it.  Talented  African
Americans flocked to the district, where they created
bold new art forms and asserted ties to Africa.

Candidate

Herbert C. Hoover
(Republican)

Alfred E. Smith
(Democrat)

Electoral
Vote

Popular
Vote

Percent of
Popular Vote

444

21,391,993

58.2

87

15,016,169

40.9

MAP 22.2
The Presidential Election of 1928

Historians still debate the extent to which 1928 was a
critical election — an election that produced a signi ﬁcant
realignment in voting behavior. Although Republi can
Herbert Hoover swept the popular and the electoral
votes, Democrat Alfred E. Smith won majorities not only
in the South, his party’s traditional stronghold, but also
in Rhode Island, Massachusetts, and (although it is not
evident on this map) all of the large cities of the North
and Midwest. In subsequent elections, the Democrats
won even more votes among African Americans and
European ethnic groups and, until 1980, were the
nation’s dominant political party.

southern  Protestants  refused  to  vote  for  a  Catholic,
Hoover carried five ex-Confederate states, breaking the
Democratic  “Solid  South”  for  the  first  time  since
Reconstruction. Smith, though, carried industrialized
Massachusetts and Rhode Island as well as the nation’s
twelve largest cities, suggesting that urban voters were
moving into the Democrats’ camp.

Intellectual Modernism
The horrors of World War I prompted many intellectu-
als to question long-standing assumptions about civili-
zation, progress, and the alleged superiority of Western
cultures  over  so-called  primitive  ways  of  life.  In  the
United States, these questions contributed to struggles
between modernity and tradition, reflected not only in
politics  but  also  in  art  and  literature.  Some  of  these
intellectual movements had their roots in the devasta-
tion  of  Europe;  others — such  as  the  Harlem  Renais-
sance — emerged from social upheavals the Great War
had wrought at home.

Black  Writers  and  Artists  Poet  Langston  Hughes
captured the upbeat spirit of the  Harlem  Renaissance
when  he  asserted,  “I  am  a N egro — and  beautiful.”
Other writers and artists also championed race pride.
Claude McKay and Jean Toomer represented in fiction
what philosopher Alain Locke called, in an influential
1925  book,  The  New  Negro.  Painter  Jacob  Lawrence,
who  had  grown  up  in  crowded  tenement  districts  of
the urban North, used bold shapes and vivid colors to
portray the daily life, aspirations, and suppressed anger
of African Americans.

No one embodied the energy and optimism of the
Harlem  Renaissance  more  than  Zora  Neale  Hurston.
Born in the prosperous black community of Eatonville,
Florida,  Hurston  had  been  surrounded  as  a  child  by
examples  of  achievement,  though  she  struggled  later
with poverty and isolation. In contrast to some other
black  thinkers,  Hurston  believed  African  American
culture could be understood without heavy emphasis
on the impact of white oppression. After enrolling at
Barnard  College  and  studying  with  anthropologist
Franz  Boas,  Hurston  traveled  through  the  South  and
the  Caribbean  for  a  decade,  documenting  folklore,
songs,  and  religious  beliefs.  She  incorporated  this
material into her short stories and novels, celebrating
the  humor  and  spiritual  strength  of  ordinary  black
men  and  women.  Like  other  work  of  the  Harlem
Renaissance,  Hurston’s  stories  and  novels  sought  to
articulate what it meant, as black intellectual W. E. B.
Du Bois wrote, “to be both a Negro and an American.”

Jazz  To  millions  of  Americans,  the  most  famous
product of the Harlem Renaissance was jazz. Though
the  origins  of  the  word  are  unclear,  many  historians
believe it was a slang term for sex — an etymology that
makes  sense,  given  the  music’s  early  association with
urban vice districts. As a musical form, jazz coalesced
in  New  Orleans  and  other  parts  of  the  South  before
World War I. Borrowing from blues, ragtime, and other
popular forms, jazz musicians developed an ensemble
style  in  which  performers,  keeping  a  rapid  ragtime
beat,  improvised  around  a  basic  melodic  line.  The
majority of early jazz musicians were black, but white

