CHAPTER 22

  Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932

719

Archibald Motley, Blues, 1929

Painter Archibald Motley (1891–1981) was born
in New Orleans but arrived in Chicago as a small
child, when his family — like thousands of other
African Americans — moved north in search of
opportunity. Motley was able to study at the Art
Institute of Chicago and by the 1920s also showed
his work in New York City. Many of his paintings
depicted life in the predominantly African Ameri-
can neighborhood on Chicago’s South Side that
was widely known as the Black Belt. This piece,
Blues, was painted when Motley was living in
Paris. It shows the powerful impact jazz had on
European listeners. Art Institute of Chicago.

performers, some of whom had more formal training,
injected elements of European concert music.

In the 1920s, as jazz spread nationwide, musicians
developed its signature mode, the improvised solo. The
key  figure  in  this  development  was  trumpeter  Louis
Armstrong.  A  native  of  New  Orleans,  Armstrong
learned his craft playing in the saloons and brothels of
the city’s vice district. Like tens of thousands of other
African Americans he moved north, settling in Chicago
in 1922. Armstrong showed an inexhaustible capacity
for melodic invention, and his dazzling solos inspired
other musicians. By the late 1920s, soloists became the
celebrities of jazz, thrilling audiences with their impro-
visational skill.

As jazz spread, it followed the routes of the Great
Migration from the South to northern and midwestern
cities,  where  it  met  consumers  primed  to  receive  it.
Most cities had plentiful dance halls where jazz could
be featured. Radio also helped popularize jazz, with the
emerging  record  industry  marketing  the  latest  tunes.
As  white  listeners  flocked  to  ballrooms  and  clubs  to
hear Duke Ellington and other stars, Harlem became
the hub of this commercially lucrative jazz. Those who
hailed “primitive”  black music rarely suspended their
racial condescension: visiting a mixed-race club became
known as “slumming.”

The  recording  industry  soon  developed  race
records  specifically  aimed  at  urban  working-class
blacks.  The  breakthrough  came  in  1920,  when  Otto

K.  E.  Heinemann,  a  producer  who  sold  immigrant
records  in  Yid dish,  Swedish,  and  other  languages,
recorded  singer  Mamie  Smith  performing  “Crazy
Blues.”  This  smash  hit  prompted  big  recording  labels
like  Columbia  and  Paramount  to  copy  Heinemann’s
approach. Yet, while its marketing reflected the segre-
gation of American society, jazz brought black music to
the  center  stage  of  American  culture.  It  became  the
era’s signature music, so much so that novelist F. Scott
Fitzgerald dubbed the 1920s the “Jazz Age.”

Marcus  Garvey  and  the  UNIA  Harlem’s  creative
energy  generated  broad  political  aspirations.  The
Harlem-based Universal Negro Improvement Associa-
tion (UNIA), led by charismatic Jamaican-born Marcus
Garvey, arose in the 1920s to mobilize African Ameri-
can  workers  and  champion  black  separatism.  Garvey
urged followers to move to Africa, arguing that people
of  African  descent  would  never  be  treated  justly  in
white-run countries.

The UNIA soon claimed four
million followers, including many
recent  migrants  to  northern  cit-
ies.  It  published  a  newspaper,
Negro  World,  and  solicited  funds
for the Black Star steamship com-
pany, which Garvey created as an
enterprise that would foster trade
with  the  West  Indies  and  carry

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the Great Migra-
tion lead to ﬂourishing
African American culture,
politics, and intellectual
life, and what form did
these activities take?

