720

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

that had sought representation at the Versailles treaty
table,  protests  against  U.S.  occupation  of  Haiti,  and
modernist experiments in literature and the arts. One
African American historian wrote in 1927, “The gran-
diose  schemes  of  Marcus  Garvey  gave  to  the  race  a
consciousness  such  as  it  had  never  possessed  before.
The  dream  of  a  united  Africa,  not  less  than  a  trip  to
France, challenged the imagination.”

Critiquing American Life
Paralleling the defiant creativity of Harlem, other art-
ists and intellectuals of the 1920s raised voices of dis-
sent. Some had endured firsthand the shock of World
War I, an experience so searing that American writer
Gertrude Stein dubbed those who survived it the Lost
Generation.  Novelist  John  Dos  Passos  railed  at  the
obscenity  of  “Mr.  Wilson’s  war”  in The Three  Soldiers
(1921). Ernest Hemingway’s novel A Farewell to Arms
(1929)  portrayed  war’s  futility  and  dehumanizing
consequences.

UNIA Parade in Harlem, Early 1920s

This photo, taken at 138th Street in Harlem, shows the
collective pride fostered by Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro
Improvement Association. What types of people do you see
in the crowd? How are they dressed? Note the slogan carried
by a rider in the automobile: “The New Negro Has No Fear.”
Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York Public
Library.

Augusta Fells Savage, African American Sculptor

Born in Florida in 1892, Augusta Fells Savage arrived in
New York in 1921 to study and remained to take part in
the Harlem Renaissance. Widowed at a young age and
struggling to support her parents and young daughter,
Savage faced both racism and poverty. Much of her work
has been lost because she sculpted in clay and could not
afford to cast in bronze. Savage began to speak out for
racial justice after she was denied, on the basis of her race,
a fellowship to study in Paris. In 1923, she married a close
associate of UNIA leader Marcus Garvey. Augusta Savage with
her sculpture Realization, c. 1938/Andrew Herman, photographer.
Federal Art Project, Photographic Division collection, Archives of
American Art/Smithsonian Institution.

American blacks to Africa. But the UNIA declined as
quickly as it had risen. In 1925, Garvey was imprisoned
for mail fraud because of his solicitations for the Black
Star Line. President Coolidge commuted his sentence
but  ordered  his  deportation  to  Jamaica.  Without
Garvey’s leadership, the movement collapsed.

However, the UNIA left a legacy of activism, espe-
cially  among  the  working  class.  Garvey  and  his  fol-
lowers represented an emerging pan-Africanism. They
argued  that  people  of  African
descent, in all parts of the world,
had a common destiny and should
cooperate in political action. Sev-
eral developments contributed to
this  ideal:  black  men’s  military
service  in  Europe  during  World
War I, the Pan-African Congress

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
What criticisms of main-
stream culture did
modernist American
writers offer in the
1920s?

