CHAPTER 22

  Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932

721

Other  writers  also  explored  the  dark  side  of  the
human  psyche.  In  such  dramas  as  Desire  Under  the
Elms (1924), playwright Eugene O’Neill depicted char-
acters  driven  by  raw,  ungovernable  sexual  impulses.
O’Neill  first  made  his  mark  with  The  Emperor  Jones
(1920), a popular Broadway drama about a black dicta-
tor  driven  from  power  by  his  people.  Appealing  to
Americans’ fascination with Haiti, the play offered an
ambiguous  message:  its  black  protagonist  was  played
not by the customary white actors made up in black-
face, but by African Americans who won acclaim for
their performances. W. E. B. Du Bois called it “a splen-
did tragedy.” But others were dissatisfied with the play’s
primitivism;  one  actor  who  played  Emperor  Jones
altered the script to omit offensive racial epithets. The
white crowds who made The Emperor Jones a hit, like
those  who  flocked  to  Harlem’s  jazz  clubs,  indulged  a
problematic fascination with “primitive” sexuality.

In  a  decade  of  conflict  between  traditional  and
modern worldviews, many writers exposed what they
saw  as  the  hypocrisy  of  small-town  and  rural  life
(American  Voices,  p.  722.)  The  most  savage  critic  of
conformity  was  Sinclair  Lewis,  whose  novel  Babbitt
(1922)  depicted  the  disillusionment  of  an  ordinary
small-town  salesman.  Babbitt  was  widely  denounced
as un-American; Elmer Gantry (1927), a satire about a
greedy  evangelical  minister  on  the  make,  provoked
even  greater  outrage.  But  critics  found  Lewis’s  work
superb, and in 1930 he became the first American to
win the Nobel Prize for literature. Even more famous
was F. Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby (1925), which
offered a scathing indictment of Americans’ mindless
pursuit of pleasure and material wealth.

From Boom to Bust
Spurred by rapid expansion during the war, American
business thrived in the 1920s. Corporations expanded
more and more into overseas markets, while at home a
national consumer culture emphasized leisure and fun.
But some sectors of the economy, notably agriculture,
never  recovered  from  a  sharp  recession  in  the  wake
of  World  War  I.  Meanwhile,  close  observers  worried
over  the  rapid  economic  growth  and  easy  credit  that
fueled  the  Roaring  Twenties.  Their  fears  proved  well
founded: the “Roar” ended in the Great Depression.

The Postwar Economy
Immediately after World War I, the United States expe-
rienced a series of economic shocks. They began with
rampant  inflation,  as  prices  jumped  by  one-third  in

1919 alone. Then came a two-year recession that raised
unemployment  to  10  percent.  Finally,  the  economy
began to grow smoothly, and more Americans began
to benefit. Between 1922 and 1929, national per capita
income rose an impressive 24 percent.

Large-scale  corporations  continued  to  replace
small  business  in  many  sectors  of  the  economy.  By
1929,  through  successive  waves  of  consolidation,  the
two  hundred  largest  businesses  had  come  to  control
almost  half  of  the  country’s  nonbanking  corporate
wealth.  The  greatest  number  of  mergers  occurred  in
rising industries such as chemicals (with DuPont in the
lead)  and  electrical  appliances  (General  Electric).  At
the  same  time,  mergers  between  Wall  Street  banks
enhanced  New  York  City’s  position  as  the  financial
center of the nation and increasingly the world. Aided
by Washington’s dollar diplomats, U.S. companies exer-
cised growing global power. Seeking cheaper livestock,
giant American meat-packers opened plants in Argen-
tina; the United Fruit Company developed plantations
in  Costa  Rica,  Honduras,  and  Guatemala;  General
Electric set up production facilities in Latin America,
Asia, and Australia.

Despite the boom, the U.S. economy had areas of
significant weakness throughout the 1920s. Agriculture,
which still employed one-fourth of all American work-
ers, never fully recovered from the postwar recession.
Once  Europe’s  economy  revived,  its  farmers  flooded
world  markets  with  grain  and  other  farm  products,
causing  agricultural  prices  to  fall.  Other  industries,
including coal and textiles, languished for similar rea-
sons. As a consequence, many rural Americans shared
little of the decade’s prosperity. The bottom 40 percent
of American families earned an average annual income
of  only  $725  (about  $9,100  today).  Many,  especially
rural tenants and sharecroppers, languished in poverty
and malnutrition.

Consumer Culture
In  middle-class  homes,  Americans  of  the  1920s  sat
down to a breakfast of Kellogg’s corn flakes before get-
ting  into  Ford  Model  Ts  to  work  or  shop  at  Safeway.
On weekends, they might head to the local theater to
see the newest Charlie Chaplin film. By 1929, electric
refrigerators  and  vacuum  cleaners  came  into  use  in
affluent  homes;  40  percent  of  American  households
owned a radio. The advertising industry reached new
levels  of  ambition  and  sophistication,  entering  what
one historian calls the era of the “aggressive hard sell.”
The 1920s gave birth, for example, to fashion modeling
and  style  consulting.  “Sell  them  their  dreams,”  one
radio  announcer  urged  advertisers  in  1923.  “People

