A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Urban Writers Describe

Small-Town America

In the early twentieth century, the United States was becoming an urban society.
By 1920, life outside the metropolis seemed sufﬁciently remarkable to warrant
sociological investigation — or at least, city people thought so. Presented here
are three views of rural and small-town America, all published during the 1920s.
Though  cities  had  become  the  wellspring  of  American  intellectual  life,  urban
writers juxtaposed their own experiences with those of people they thought of
as living in “Middletown, U.S.A.”

Sinclair Lewis
Main Street

In  his  novel  Main  Street  (1920),  Sinclair  Lewis  portrayed
the  ﬁctional  midwestern  town  of  Gopher  Prairie.  In  the
excerpts below, Lewis’s narrator describes the reactions of
young, urban Carol Kennicott, wife of the town’s new doc-
tor, and Bea Sorenson, a Swedish American farm girl.

When Carol had walked for thirty-two minutes she had
completely covered the town, east and west, north and
south; and she stood at the corner of Main Street and
Washington Avenue and despaired.

Main Street with its two-story brick shops, its story-
and-a-half wooden residences, its muddy expanse from
concrete walk to walk, its huddle of Fords and lumber-
wagons, was too small to absorb her. The broad, straight,
unenticing gashes of the streets let in the grasping prairie
on every side. She realized the vastness and the emptiness
of the land. The skeleton iron windmill on the farm a few
blocks away, at the north end of Main Street, was like the
ribs of a dead cow. She thought of the coming of the
Northern winter, when the unprotected houses would
crouch together in terror of storms galloping out of that
wild waste. They were so small and weak, the little brown
houses. They were shelters for sparrows. . . .

She wanted to run, fleeing from the encroaching

prairie, demanding the security of a great city. Her
dreams of creating a beautiful town were ludicrous.
Oozing out from every drab wall, she felt a forbidding
spirit which she could never conquer.

She trailed down the street on one side, back on the

other, glancing into the cross streets. It was a private
Seeing Main Street tour. She was within ten minutes
beholding not only the heart of a place called Gopher
Prairie, but ten thousand towns from Albany to San
Diego.

Dyer’s Drug Store, a corner building of regular and
unreal blocks of artificial stone. Inside the store, a greasy
marble soda-fountain with an electric lamp of red and
green and curdled-yellow mosaic shade. Pawed-over

722

heaps of toothbrushes and combs and packages of
shaving-soap. Shelves of soap-cartons, teething-rings,
garden-seeds, and patent medicines in yellow pack-
ages — nostrums for consumption, for “women’s
diseases” — notorious mixtures of opium and alcohol,
in the very shop to which her husband sent patients
for the filling of prescriptions.

The train which brought Carol to Gopher Prairie also
brought Miss Bea Sorenson.

Miss Bea was a stalwart, corn-colored, laughing young
woman, and she was bored by farm-work. She desired the
excitements of city-life, and the way to enjoy city-life was,
she had decided, to “go get a yob as a hired girl in Gopher
Prairie.” . . .

Bea had never before been in a town larger than
Scandia Crossing, which has sixty-seven inhabitants.

As she marched up the street she was meditating that

it didn’t hardly seem like it was possible there could be
so many folks all in one place at the same time. My! It
would take years to get acquainted with them all. And
swell people, too! A fine big gentleman in a new pink
shirt with a diamond, and not no washed-out blue
denim working-shirt. A lovely lady in a longery dress
(but it must be an awful hard dress to wash). And the
stores! . . . A drug store with a soda fountain that was just
huge, awful long, and all lovely marble . . . and the soda
spouts, they were silver, and they came right out of the
bottom of the lamp-stand! Behind the fountain there were
glass shelves, and bottles of new kinds of soft drinks, that
nobody ever heard of. Suppose a fella took you there!

Anzia Yezierska
Bread Givers

A child of Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe, Anzia
Yezierska  grew  up  on  the  Lower  East  Side  of  New  York
City.  In  her  autobiographical  novel  Bread  Givers  (1925),
Yezierska described her arrival in the Ohio town where she
attended college.

