Before this, New York was all of America to me. But now
I came to a town of quiet streets, shaded with green trees.
No crowds, no tenements. No hurrying noise to beat the
race of the hours. Only a leisured quietness whispered in
the air: Peace. . . .

Each house had its own green grass in front, its own
free space all around, and it faced the street with the calm
security of being owned for generations, and not rented
by the month from a landlord. In the early twilight, it was
like a picture out of fairyland to see people sitting on their
porches, lazily swinging in their hammocks, or watering
their own growing flowers.

So these are the real Americans, I thought, thrilled by
the lean, straight bearing of the passers-by. They had none
of that terrible fight for bread and rent that I always saw
in the New York people’s eyes. . . . All the young people I
had ever seen were shut up in factories. But here were
young girls and young men enjoying life, free from the
worry for a living. . . . The spick-and-span cleanliness of
these people! It smelled from them, the soap and the
bathing. Their fingernails so white and pink. . . . What a
feast of happenings each day of college was to those other
students. Societies, dances, letters from home, packages of
food, midnight spreads and even birthday parties. I never
knew that there were people glad enough of life to cel-
ebrate the day they were born.

Source: From Bread Givers by Anzia Yezierska. Copyright © 1970 by Louise Levitas
Henriksen. Reprinted by permission of Persea Books, Inc., New York. All rights
reserved.

Robert S. Lynd and Helen Merrell Lynd
Middletown

In 1929, sociologists Robert S. Lynd and Helen Merrell Lynd
published Middletown, a study of life in a small midwest-
ern  city.  Middletown  was  not  a  single  community  but  a
composite of several communities studied by the Lynds.

The first real automobile appeared in Middletown in
1900. . . . At the close of 1923 there were 6,221 passenger
cars in the city, one for every 6.1 persons, or roughly two
for every three families. . . . As, at the turn of the century,
business class people began to feel apologetic if they did
not have a telephone, so ownership of an automobile has
now reached the point of being an accepted essential of
normal living. . . .

According to an officer of a Middletown automobile
financing company, 75 to 90 percent of the cars purchased

locally are bought on time payment, and a working man
earning $35.00 a week frequently plans to use one week’s
pay each month as payment for his car. The automobile
has apparently unsettled the habit of careful saving for
some families. . . . “I’ll go without food before I’ll see us
give up the car,” said one woman emphatically. . . .

Many families feel that an automobile is justified as
an agency holding the family group together. . . . [But] the
fact that 348 boys and 382 girls in the three upper years of
the high school placed “use of the automobile” fifth and
fourth respectively in a list of twelve possible sources of
disagreement between them and their parents suggests
that this may be an increasing decentralizing agent. . . .
If the automobile touches the rest of Middletown’s
living at many points, it has revolutionized its leisure . . .
making leisure-time enjoyment a regularly expected part
of every day and week rather than an occasional event. . . .
The frequency of movie attendance of high school boys
and girls is about equal, business class families tend to go
more often than do working class families, and children
of both groups attend more often without their parents
than do all the individuals or combinations of family
members put together. . . . It is probable that time for-
merly spent in lodges, saloons, and unions is now being
spent in part at the movies, at least occasionally with
other members of the family. Like the automobile and
radio, the movies [break] up leisure time into an indi-
vidual, family, or small group affair.

Source: Excerpt from Middletown: A Study in American Culture, by Robert S. Lynd and
Helen M. Lynd. Copyright © 1929 by Harcourt, Inc. and renewed 1957 by Robert S. and
Helen M. Lynd. Reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing
Company. All rights reserved.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  What attitudes toward the small town and big city does
Main Street represent? Why do you think Lewis includes
views as different as Carol’s and Bea’s?

2.  How does the urban experience of Yezierska’s narrator
shape her reaction to life in an Ohio town? How might
small-town residents have reacted to her description of
them as “the real Americans”? How might Lewis have
responded to Yezierska’s description?

3.  How do the two novelists (Lewis and Yezierska) dif-

fer from the sociologists (the Lynds) in the issues they
emphasize, and in their tone and point of view? What
features of small-town life does each text emphasize?

723

