724

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

American Companies Abroad

United Fruit was one of the many
American companies that found opportu-
nities for investment in South America in
the 1920s and that introduced tropical
foods to the United States. The company
used elaborate and informative color adver-
tisements to sell its products. Bananas were
sufﬁciently exotic that the ads explained to
consumers how to tell when bananas were
ripe and how to store them (“Never place
them in the ice-box”). John W. Hartman
Center/Duke University Special Collections
Library.

don’t buy things to have things. . . . They buy hope —
hope of what your merchandise will do for them.”

In practice, participation in consumer culture was
as contested as the era’s politics. It was no accident that
white mobs in the Tulsa race riot plundered radios and
phonograph players from prosperous African Ameri-
can homes: the message was that whites deserved such
items  and  blacks  did  not.  But  neither  prosperity  nor
poverty was limited by race. Surrounded by exhorta-
tions to indulge in luxuries, millions of working-class
Americans barely squeaked by, with wives and mothers
often working to pay for basic necessities. In times of
crisis, some families sold their furniture, starting with
pianos and phonographs and continuing, if necessary,
to dining tables and beds. In the Los Angeles suburb of
South Gate, white working-class men secured jobs in
the  steel  and  automobile  industries,  but  prices  were

high and families often found it difficult to make ends
meet. Self-help was the watchword as families bartered
with neighbors and used their yards to raise vegetables,
rabbits, and chickens.

The lure of consumer culture created friction. Wives
resented  husbands  who  spent  all  their  discretionary
cash  at  the  ballpark.  Generational  conflicts  emerged,
especially when wage-earning children challenged the
expectation that their pay should go “all to mother.” In
St. Louis, a Czech-born woman was exasperated when
her son and daughter stopped contributing to rent and
food and pooled their wages to buy a car. In Los Angeles,
one fifteen-year-old girl spent her summer earning $2
a day at a local factory. Planning to enroll in business
school, she spent $75 on dressy shoes and “a black coat
with a red fox collar.” Her brother reported that “Mom
is angry at her for ‘squandering’ so much money.”

