CHAPTER 22

  Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932

725

Many poor and affluent families shared one thing
in  common:  they  stretched  their  incomes,  small  or
large,  through  new  forms  of  borrowing  such  as  auto
loans and installment plans. “Buy now, pay later,” said
the ads, and millions did. Anyone, no matter how rich,
could get into debt, but consumer credit was particu-
larly  perilous  for  those  living  on  the  economic  mar-
gins.  In  Chicago,  one  Lithuanian  man  described  his
neighbor’s situation: “She ain’t got no money. Sure she
buys on credit, clothes for the children and everything.”
Such borrowing turned out to be a factor in the bust
of 1929.

The Automobile  No possession proved more popu-
lar than the automobile, a showpiece of modern con-
sumer  capitalism  that  revolutionized  American  life.
Car sales played a major role in the decade’s economic
boom: in one year, 1929, Americans spent $2.58 billion
on automobiles. By the end of the decade, they owned
23 million cars — about 80 percent of the world’s auto-
mobiles — or an average of one for every six people.

The  auto  industry’s  exuberant  expansion  rippled
through the economy, with both positive and negative
results.  It  stimulated  steel,  petroleum,  chemical,  rub-
ber,  and  glass  production  and,  directly  or  indirectly,
created 3.7 million jobs. Highway construction became

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
How did the radio, auto-
mobile, and Hollywood
movies exemplify the
opportunities and the
risks of 1920s consumer
culture?

a  billion-dollar-a-year  enterprise,
financed by federal subsidies and
state  gasoline  taxes.  Car  owner-
ship spurred urban sprawl and, in
1924, the first suburban shopping
center:  Country  Club  Plaza  out-
side  Kansas  City,  Missouri.  But
cars  were  expensive,  and  most
Americans bought them on credit.
This created risks not only for buyers but for the whole
economy. Borrowers who could not pay off car loans
lost  their  entire  investment  in  the  vehicle;  if  they
defaulted, banks were left holding unpaid loans. Amid
the boom of the 1920s, however, few worried about this
result.

Cars  changed  the  way  Americans  spent  their  lei-
sure time, as proud drivers took their machines on the
road.  An  infrastructure  of  gas  stations,  motels,  and
drive-in restaurants soon catered to drivers. Railroad
travel faltered. The American Automobile Association,
founded in 1902, estimated that by 1929 almost a third
of  the  population  took  vacations  by  car.  As  early  as
1923, Colorado had 247 autocamps. “I had a few days
after I got my wheat cut,” reported one Kansas farmer,
“so  I  just  loaded  my  family . . . and  lit  out.”  An  elite
Californian complained that automobile travel was no

Automobiles at Jacksonville Beach, Florida, 1923

The automobile transformed Americans’ leisure pursuits. As proud car owners took to the road in ever-larger
numbers, the “vacation” became a summer staple. Auto travel created a booming business in gas stations,
roadside motels, campgrounds, and sightseeing destinations. A Florida vacation — once reserved for wealthy
northeasterners who had traveled to Miami’s exclusive hotels by ﬁrst-class rail car — became an attainable
luxury for middle-class and even some working-class families. © Curt Teich Postcard Archives, Lake County Museum.

