726

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

deal of time watching the faces of the audience,” Zukor
recalled. “With a little experience I could see, hear, and
‘feel’  the  reaction  to  each  melodrama  and  comedy.”
Founding Paramount Pictures, Zukor signed emerging
stars and produced successful feature-length films.

By 1920,  Hollywood reigned as the world’s movie
capital, producing nearly 90 percent of all films. Large,
ornate  movie  palaces  attracted  both  middle-class
and  working-class  audiences.  Idols  such  as  Rudolph
Valentino, Mary Pickford, and Douglas Fairbanks set
national  trends  in  style.  Thousands  of  young  women
followed  the  lead  of  actress  Clara  Bow,  Hollywood’s
famous flapper, who flaunted her boyish figure. Decked
out  in  knee-length  skirts,  flappers  shocked  the  older
generation by smoking and wearing makeup.

Flappers  represented  only  a  tiny  minority  of
women, but thanks to the movies and advertising, they
became  influential  symbols  of  women’s  sexual  and
social  emancipation.  In  cities,  young  immigrant
women eagerly bought makeup and the latest flapper
fashions  and  went  dancing  to  jazz.  Jazz  stars  helped
popularize  the  style  among  working-class  African
Americans.  Mexican  American  teenagers  joined  the
trend, though they usually found themselves under the
watchful eyes of la dueña, the chaperone.

Politicians  quickly  grasped  the  publicity  value  of
American radio and film to foreign relations. In 1919,
with  government  support,  General  Electric  spear-
headed the creation of Radio Corporation of America
(RCA) to expand U.S. presence in foreign radio mar-
kets. RCA — which had a federal appointee on its board
of  directors — emerged  as  a  major  provider  of  radio
transmission  in  Latin  America  and  East  Asia.  Mean-
while, by 1925, American films made up 95 percent of
the  movies  screened  in  Britain,  80  percent  in  Latin
America,  and  70  percent  in  France  (America  Com-
pared,  p.  727).  The  United  States  was  experimenting
with what historians call soft power — the exercise of
popular cultural influence — as radio and film exports
celebrated the American Dream.

The Coming of the Great Depression
By  1927,  strains  on  the  economy  began  to  show.
Consumer lending had become the tenth-largest busi-
ness  in  the  country,  topping  $7  billion  that  year.
Increasing  numbers  of  Americans  bought  into  the
stock market, often with unrealistic expectations. One
Yale  professor  proclaimed  that  stocks  had  reached  a
“permanently  high  plateau.”  Corporate  profits  were
so  high  that  some  companies,  fully  invested  in  their
own operations, plowed excess earnings into the stock

Charlie Chaplin and Jackie Coogan

Charlie Chaplin (left) and Jackie Coogan starred together
in The Kid (1921), a silent comedy that also included
sentimental and dramatic moments, promising viewers
“a smile . . . and perhaps a tear.” Chaplin, born in London
in 1889, moved to the United States in 1912 and over the
next two decades reigned as one of Hollywood’s most
famous silent ﬁlm stars. In 1919, he joined with D. W.
Grifﬁth, Mary Pickford, and other American directors and
stars to create the independent studio United Artists. The
Kid made the Los Angeles–born Coogan — discovered by
Chaplin on the vaudeville stage — into America’s ﬁrst child
star. Library of Congress.

longer  “aristocratic.”  “The  clerks  and  their  wives  and
sweethearts,” observed a reporter, “driving through the
Wisconsin lake country, camping at Niagara, scattering
tin cans and pop bottles over the Rockies, made those
places taboo for bankers.”

Hollywood  Movies formed a second centerpiece of
consumer  culture.  In  the  1910s,  the  moviemaking
industry had begun moving to southern California to
take  advantage  of  cheap  land,  sunshine,  and  varied
scenery within easy reach. The large studios — United
Artists, Paramount, and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer — were
run  mainly  by  Eastern  European  Jewish  immigrants
like Adolph Zukor, who arrived from Hungary in the
1880s. Starting with fur sales, Zukor and a partner then
set up five-cent theaters in Manhattan. “I spent a good

