A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Hollywood in Europe

European ﬁlm studios struggled after World War I to reach audiences who had
fallen in love with American movies. Working-class Europeans, in particular, pre-
ferred Hollywood’s offerings to the ﬁlms produced in Europe. In this 1928 article
from a cinematography journal, German expressionist ﬁlmmaker Erich Pommer
suggested new strategies for expanding an audience for European ﬁlms. Expres-
sionists, inﬂuenced by romanticism and modernism, explored dark themes such
as  spiritual  crisis  and  insanity.  (A  famous  example  of  expressionist  painting  is
Edvard  Munch’s  The  Scream.)  Pommer  worked  for  American  studios  and  later
ﬂed to the United States after the rise of Hitler.

The towering importance of the American motion picture
on the world’s markets cannot be safely explained by the
unlimited financial resources at the disposal of the Amer-
ican producers. . . . Its main reason is the mentality of the
American picture, which, notwithstanding all attacks and
claims to the contrary, apparently comes nearest to the
taste of international cinema audiences.

. . . The specific and unique element of the American

film is the fact of its being absolutely uncomplicated.
Being what is called “naïve” it knows no problems. . . .

Universal Appeal. It is really preferable to have a pic-
ture too light rather than too heavy, because in the latter
case there is a danger that the public will not understand
the story. This is the worst thing that can happen with a
picture. . . .

Spectacular Appeal. The international appeal of a
picture has its foundation in a story. It is totally inde-
pendent of the capital invested and of the splendor and
luxury used in its production. The fact that in most cases
the supers and monumental pictures have proved to be
such international successes, does not disprove this claim.

Such productions always have a simple story of universal
appeal, because it is simply impossible to use spiritual
thoughts and impressions of the soul in a picture deluxe.
The splendour in such production is not merely created
for decoration — it is its outstanding purpose. . . . But
splendour means show, and a show is always and every-
where easy to understand. . . .

Source: Excerpt from “The International Picture: A Lesson on Simplicity” by Erich
Pommer from “Film Europe” and “Film America”: Cinema, Commerce and Cultural
Exchange 1920–1939, edited by Andrew Higson and Richard Maltby, 1999, ISBN:
978-0-85989-546-0. Used by permission of Exeter University Press.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  How does Pommer characterize the attraction of popular
American ﬁlms for European audiences? What does he
mean when he calls those ﬁlms “naïve”?

2.  How does Pommer propose to produce German ﬁlms that
will compete with Hollywood? What constraints and chal-
lenges did he face?

market.  Other  market  players  compounded  risk  by
purchasing on margin. An investor might, for example,
spend $20 of his own money and borrow $80 to buy a
$100 share of stock, expecting to pay back the loan as
the stock rose quickly in value. This worked as long as
the economy grew and the stock market climbed. But
those conditions did not last.

Yet when the stock market fell, in a series of plunges
between  October  25  and  November  13,  1929,  few
onlookers  understood  the  magnitude  of  the  crisis.
Cyclical  downturns  had  been  a  familiar  part  of  the
industrializing economy since the panic of the 1830s;
they  tended  to  follow  periods  of  rapid  growth  and
speculation. A sharp recent recession, in 1921, had not

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What domestic and global
factors helped cause the
Great Depression?

triggered  disaster.  The  market
rose  again  in  late  1929  and  early
1930,  and  while  a  great  deal
of  money  had  been  lost,  most
Americans  hoped  the  aftermath
of  the  crash  would  be  brief.  In  fact,  the  nation  had
entered the Great Depression. Over the next four years,
industrial  production  fell  37  percent.  Construction
plunged  78  percent.  Prices  for  crops  and  other  raw
materials, already low, fell by half. By 1932, unemploy-
ment had reached a staggering 24 percent (Figure 22.1).
A  precipitous  drop  in  consumer  spending  deep-
ened  the  crisis.  Facing  hard  times  and  unemploy-
ment,  Americans  cut  back  dramatically,  creating  a

727

