728

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

24.9

23.6

21.7

20.1

19.0

16.9

17.2

14.3

14.6

15.9

8.7

9.9

4.7

1.9

1.2

1.9

8.5

11.7

6.7

5.1

4.6

5.2

5.0

4.2

3.2

3.3

3.2

1.4 1.4

2.4

1.8

1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

d
e
y
o
l
p
m
e
n
u
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

20

15

10

5

0

FIGURE 22.1
Unemployment, 1915–1945

During the 1920s, business prosperity and low rates of immigration resulted in historically low
unemployment levels. The Great Depression threw millions of  people out of work; by 1933, one in
four American workers was unemployed, and the rate remained high until 1941, when the nation
mobilized for World War II.

vicious cycle of falling demand and forfeited loans. In
late 1930, several major banks went under, victims of
overextended  credit  and  reckless  management.  The
following year, as industrial production slowed, a much
larger wave of bank failures occurred, causing an even
greater  shock.  Since  the  government  did  not  insure
bank  deposits,  accounts  in  failed  banks  simply  van-
ished.  Some  people  who  had  had  steady  jobs  and
comfortable  savings  found  themselves  broke  and  out
of work.

Not all Americans were devastated by the depres-
sion; the middle class did not disappear and the rich
lived  in  accustomed  luxury.  But  incomes  plummeted
even  among  workers  who  kept  their  jobs.  Salt  Lake
City went bankrupt in 1931. Barter systems developed,
as barbers traded haircuts for onions and potatoes and
laborers worked for payment in eggs or pork. “We do
not dare to use even a little soap,” reported one jobless
Oregonian,  “when  it  will  pay  for  an  extra  egg,  a  few
more  carrots  for  our  children.”  “I  would  be  only  too
glad to dig ditches to keep my family from going hun-
gry,” wrote a North Carolina man.

Where did desperate people turn for aid? Their first
hope  lay  in  private  charity,  especially  churches  and
synagogues.  But  by  the  winter  of  1931,  these  institu-
tions were overwhelmed, unable to keep pace with the
extraordinary  need.  Only  eight  states  provided  even
minimal unemployment insurance. There was no pub-
lic support for the elderly, statistically among the poor-
est  citizens.  Few  Americans  had  any  retirement  sav-
ings, and many who had saved watched their accounts
erased by failing banks.

Even those who were not wiped out had to adapt to
depression conditions. Couples delayed marriage and
reduced the number of children they conceived. As a
result, the marriage rate fell to a historical low, and by
1933  the  birthrate  dropped  from  97  births  per  1,000
women to 75. Often the responsibility for birth control
fell  to  women.  It  was  “one  of  the  worst  problems  of
women whose husbands were out of work,” a Cali for-
nian told a reporter. Campaigns against hiring married
women  were  common,  on  the  theory  that  available
jobs should go to male breadwinners. Three-quarters
of the nation’s school districts banned married women

