CHAPTER 22

  Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932

729

Minnesota Potato Farmers

The prosperity and consumer pleasures
of the 1920s hardly extended to all
Americans. This Minnesota family had
horses, not a tractor; many of the
women’s clothes were probably made
by hand. Rural and working-class
Americans, who often struggled in the
1920s, found conditions even harsher
after 1929. On the other hand, farm-
ers had resources to fall back on that
city folks did not: they could grow
their own food, and they had long
experience in “making do.” Minnesota
Historical Society.

from working as teachers — ignoring the fact that many
husbands  were  less  able  to  earn  than  ever  before.
Despite restrictions, female employment increased, as
women expanded their financial contributions to their
families in hard times.

The depression crossed regional boundaries, though
its  severity  varied  from  place  to  place.  Bank  failures
clustered  heavily  in  the  Midwest  and  plains,  while
areas dependent on timber, mining, and other extrac-
tive industries suffered catastrophic declines. Although
southern states endured less unemployment because of
their smaller manufacturing base, farm wages plunged.
In  many  parts  of  the  country,  unemployment  rates
among black men stood at double that of white men;
joblessness  among  African  American  women  was
triple that of white women.

By 1932, comprehending the magnitude of the cri-
sis,  Americans  went  to  the  ballot  box  and  decisively
rejected the probusiness, antiregulatory policies of the
1920s. A few years earlier, with business booming, pol-
itics  had  been  so  placid  that  people  chuckled  when
President  Coolidge  disappeared  on  extended  fishing
trips. Now, Americans wanted bold action in Washing-
ton. Faced with the cataclysm of the Great Depression,
Americans  would  transform  their  government  and
create a modern welfare state.

SUMMARY
Although  involvement  in  World  War  I  strengthened
the United States economically and diplomatically, it
left  the  nation  profoundly  unsettled.  Racial  tensions
exploded after the war as African Americans pursued
new  opportunities  and  asserted  their  rights.  Mean-
while, labor unrest grew as employers cut wages and
sought  to  break  unions.  Labor’s  power  declined
sharply  in  the  war’s  aftermath,  while  anxieties  over
radicalism  and  immigration  prompted  a  nationwide
Red Scare.

The politics of the 1920s brought a backlash against
prewar progressivism. The agenda of women reformers
met very limited success. Republican administrations
pursued probusiness “normalcy” at home and “dollar
diplomacy”  abroad.  Prohibition  and  the  Scopes  trial
demonstrated  the  influence  religion  could  exert  on
public policy, while rising nativism fueled a resurgent
Ku Klux Klan and led to sweeping new restrictions on
immigration.

Postwar alienation found artistic expression in new
forms of modernism, which denounced the dehuman-
izing effects of war and criticized American material-
ism  and  hypocrisy.  Spreading  throughout  the  nation

