730

PART 7

  CHAPTER REVIEW

from New Orleans, jazz appealed to elite and popular
audiences  alike.  Black  artists  and  intellectuals  of  the
Harlem Renaissance, including many inspired by pan-
African  ideas,  explored  the  complexities  of  African
American life.

Business  thrived  and  a  booming  consumer  cul-
ture,  exemplified  by  the  radio,  the  automobile,  and

Hollywood films, created new forms of leisure, influ-
encing daily  life  and  challenging  older sexual norms.
However, the risky speculation and easy credit of the
1920s  undermined  the  foundations  of  the  economy.
After the 1929 crash, these factors, along with a range
of  interconnected  global  conditions,  plunged  the
United States into the Great Depression.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

Key People

Adkins v. Children’s Hospital

(p. 707)

welfare capitalism (p. 708)
Red Scare (p. 708)
Palmer raids (p. 709)
Sheppard-Towner Federal

Maternity and Infancy Act
(p. 709)

Women’s International League

for Peace and Freedom (p. 710)

associated state (p. 710)
Teapot Dome (p. 710)
dollar diplomacy (p. 711)
prohibition (p. 712)
American Civil Liberties Union

(p. 713)

Scopes trial (p. 713)
National Origins Act (p. 713)
Ku Klux Klan (p. 714)
Harlem Renaissance (p. 718)
jazz (p. 718)
Universal Negro Improvement

Association (p. 719)
pan-Africanism (p. 720)
Lost Generation (p. 720)
consumer credit (p. 725)
Hollywood (p. 726)
flapper (p. 726)
soft power (p. 726)

A. Mitchell Palmer (p. 708)
Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo

Vanzetti (p. 709)
Henry Ford (p. 714)
Leo Frank (p. 714)
Zora Neale Hurston (p. 718)
Louis Armstrong (p. 719)
Marcus Garvey (p. 719)
Adolph Zukor (p. 726)

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  What was the Republican vision of “normalcy,” and
how did the Harding and Coolidge administrations
seek to realize it?

2.  Along  what  lines  did  Americans  find  themselves
divided  in  the  1920s?  How  were  those  conflicts
expressed in politics? In culture and intellectual life?

