CHAPTER 22

  CHAPTER REVIEW

731

3.  What factors contributed to the economic boom of

the 1920s and the crash that followed?

4.  THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING  Between 1917
and 1945, the “Roaring Twenties” were the only years
when the United States did not face a major eco-
nomic or international crisis. Review the categories

of “America in the World,” “Politics and Power,” and
“Identity” on the thematic timeline on page 671. In
what  ways  do  they  suggest  that  the  prosperous
1920s were a politically distinctive era? What conti-
nuities do you see in politics and foreign policy?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS TIME AND PLACE  The Ku Klux Klan
of the Reconstruction era (Chapter 15) emerged in
a  specific  political  and  social  context;  while  the
Klan of the 1920s built on its predecessor, its goals
and  scope  were  different.  Using  material  from
Chapters 15 and 22, imagine that you are investi-
gating a series of Klan meetings in each era (1870s
and 1920s). Where would you conduct your inves-
tigation? How might you explain, to the public, the
Klan’s membership and activities? How would you
compare the two Klans?

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  This chapter includes two
depictions of people dancing to jazz: the Life maga-
zine cover that opens the chapter (p. 705) and Blues
(p. 719) by Archibald John Motley Jr., an African
American painter of the Harlem Renaissance. Look
at these pictures carefully. Who do you think were
the  intended  audiences  for  each?  What  evidence
could you point to in support of that conclusion?
What  messages  do  you  think  the  Life  artist  and
Motley wanted to convey?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Lynn Dumenil, The Modern Temper (1995). A
readable overview of events in the 1920s.

David Levering Lewis, When Harlem Was in Vogue
(1979). A wonderful account of politics, arts, and
culture in the vibrant “Negro capital of the world.”

Daniel Okrent, Last Call: The Rise and Fall of Prohibi-
tion (2010). A lively recent history of the movement to
ban liquor.

Martha L. Olney, Buy Now, Pay Later (1991). Explores
the rise and impact of consumer credit.

Mary A. Renda, Taking Haiti (2001). A compelling
exploration of U.S. occupation of Haiti and its impact
on Haiti and especially the United States.

The PBS series American Experience has produced an
excellent documentary on the Scopes trial; informa-
tion and documents are available at pbs.org/wgbh/
amex/monkeytrial/. For a broad view of the 1929
crash and its impact, see pbs.org/wgbh/amex/crash.

