Managing the Great Depression,
Forging the New Deal
1929–1939

In his inaugural address in March 1933,

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
What  new  roles  did  the  American
government  take  on  during  the
New Deal, and how did these roles
shape the economy and society?

President  Franklin  Delano  Roosevelt
did  not  hide  the  country’s  precarious
condition. “A host of unemployed citizens
face  the  grim  problem  of  existence,”  he
said,  “and  an  equally  great  number  toil
with little return. Only a foolish optimist can deny the dark realities of the moment.”
Roosevelt, his demeanor sincere and purposeful, saw both despair and determination as
he looked out over the country. “This nation asks for action, and action now.” From
Congress he would request “broad Executive power to wage a war against the emer-
gency, as great as the power that would be given to me if we were in fact invaded by a
foreign foe.” With these words, Roosevelt launched a program of federal activism —
which he called the New Deal — that would change the nature of American government.
The New Deal represented a new form of liberalism, a fresh interpretation of the
ideology of individual rights that had long shaped the character of American society and
politics.  Classical  nineteenth-century  liberals  believed  that,  to  protect  those  rights,
government should be small and relatively weak. However, the “regulatory” liberals of
the  early  twentieth  century  had  safeguarded  individual  freedom  and  opportunity  by
strengthening  state  and  federal  control  over  large  businesses  and  monopolies.  New
Deal  activists  went  much  further:  their  social-welfare  liberalism  expanded  individual
rights to include economic security. Beginning in the 1930s and continuing through the
1960s, they increased the responsibility of the national government for the welfare of
ordinary citizens. Their efforts did not go unchallenged. Conservative critics of the New
Deal charged that its “big government” programs were paternalistic and dangerous,
undermining individual responsibility and constraining personal freedom. This division
between  the  advocates  and
the  critics  of  the  New  Deal
shaped American politics for
the next half century.

To see a longer excerpt of Roosevelt’s inaugural
address, along with other primary sources from this
period, see Sources for America’s History.

Before  Roosevelt  was  elected  president,  between  the  onset  of  the  depression  in
1929 and November 1932, the “dark realities of the moment” wore down American
society.  Rising  unemployment,  shuttered  businesses,  failing  banks,  and  home  fore-
closures tore at the nation’s social fabric. As crisis piled upon crisis and the federal gov-
ernment’s  initiatives  under  President  Hoover  proved  ineffectual,  Americans  had  to
reconsider more than the role of government in economic life: they had to rethink many
of the principles of individualism and free enterprise that had guided so much of the
nation’s history.

23

C H A P T E R

EARLY RESPONSES
TO THE DEPRESSION,
1929–1932

Enter Herbert Hoover

Rising Discontent

The 1932 Election

THE NEW DEAL
ARRIVES, 1933–1935

Roosevelt and the First Hundred

Days

The New Deal Under Attack

THE SECOND NEW DEAL
AND THE REDEFINING
OF LIBERALISM,
1935–1938

The Welfare State Comes into

Being

From Reform to Stalemate

THE NEW DEAL’S
IMPACT ON SOCIETY
A People’s Democracy

Reshaping the Environment

The New Deal and the Arts

The Legacies of the New Deal

734

