736

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Early Responses to the
Depression, 1929–1932
The  American  economy  collapsed  between  1929  and
1932. U.S. gross domestic product fell almost by half,
from  $103.1  billion  to  $58  billion.  Consumption
dropped  by  18  percent,  construction  by  78  percent,
and  private  investment  by  88  percent.  Nearly  9,000
banks closed their doors, and 100,000 businesses failed.
Corporate  profits  fell  from  $10  billion  to  $1  billion.
Unemployment  rose  to  25  percent.  Fifteen  million
people were out of work by 1933, and many who had
jobs took wage cuts. “Hoover made a souphound outa
me!” sang jobless harvest hands in the Southwest.

The depression respected no national boundaries.
Germany  had  preceded  the  United  States  into  eco-
nomic contraction in 1928, and its economy, burdened
by  heavy  World  War  I  reparations  payments,  was
brought to its knees  by 1929. France, Britain, Argen-
tina, Brazil, Poland, and Canada were hard hit as well
(America  Compared,  p.  737).  The  legacies  of  World
War  I  made  recovery  difficult  in  two  respects.  First,
Britain’s central bank was in no position to resume its
traditional role in managing the international financial
system.  Second,  the  war  disrupted  the  international
gold standard. The United States and most European
nations  had  tied  the  value  of  their  currencies  to  the
price of gold, and the amount of gold held in reserves,
since  the  late  nineteenth  century.  This  system  had
worked fairly well for a few decades, but it was vulner-
able  during  economic  downturns,  when  large  finan-
ciers withdrew their investments and demanded gold
payments.  The  gold  standard  rendered  the  interna-
tional  monetary  system  inflexible  at  a  moment  that
required great flexibility in global finance.

Enter Herbert Hoover
President Herbert Hoover and Congress responded to
the downturn by drawing on two powerful American
traditions. The first was the belief that economic out-
comes were the product of individual character. People’s
fate  was  in  their  own  hands,  and  success  went  to
those who deserved it. The second
tradition held that through volun-
tary action, the business commu-
nity could right itself and recover
from  economic  downturns  with-
out relying on government assis-
tance. Following these principles,
to
Hoover  asked  Americans

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What economic principles
guided President Hoover
and Congress in their
response to the Great
Depression?

tighten their belts and work hard. After the stock mar-
ket crash, he cut federal taxes in an attempt to boost
private spending and corporate investment. “Any lack
of confidence in the economic future or the strength of
business in the United States is foolish,” Hoover assured
the  country  in  late  1929.  Treasury  secretary  Andrew
Mellon  suggested  that  the  downturn  would  help
Americans “work harder” and “live a more moral life.”
While many factors caused the Great Depression,
Hoover’s adherence to the gold standard was a major
reason for its length and severity in the United States.
Faced  with  economic  catastrophe,  both  Britain  and
Germany abandoned the gold standard in 1931; when
they did so, their economies recovered modestly. But
the  Hoover  administration  feared  that  such  a  move
would  weaken  the  value  of  the  dollar.  In  reality,  an
inflexible  money  supply  discouraged  investment  and
therefore prevented growth. The Roosevelt administra-
tion would ultimately remove the United States from
the burdens of the gold standard in 1933. By that time,
however,  the  crisis  had  achieved  catastrophic  dimen-
sions. Billions had been lost in business and bank fail-
ures, and the economy had stalled completely.

Along  with  their  adherence  to  the  gold  standard,
the  Hoover  administration  and  many  congressional
Republicans  believed  in  another  piece  of  economic
orthodoxy that had protected American manufactur-
ing in good economic times but that proved damaging
during the downturn: high tariffs (taxes on imported
goods  designed  to  encourage  American  manufactur-
ing). In 1930, Republicans enacted the Smoot-Hawley
Tariff.  Despite  receiving  a  letter  from  more  than  a
thousand  economists  urging  him  to  veto  it,  Hoover
approved the legislation. What served American inter-
ests  in  earlier  eras  now  confounded  them.  Smoot-
Hawley triggered retaliatory tariffs in other countries,
which further hindered global trade and led to greater
economic  contraction  throughout  the  industrialized
world.

The president recognized that individual initiative,
voluntarism,  and  high  tariffs  might  not  be  enough,
given the depth of the crisis, so he proposed govern-
ment  action  as  well.  He  called  on  state  and  local
governments  to  provide  jobs  by  investing  in  public
projects.  And  in  1931,  he  secured  an  unprecedented
increase of $700 million in federal spending for public
works.  Hoover’s  most  innovative  program  was  the
Reconstruction  Finance  Corporation  (RFC),  which
provided  federal  loans  to  railroads,  banks,  and  other
businesses. But the RFC lent money too cautiously, and
by  the  end  of  1932,  after  a  year  in  operation,  it  had
loaned out only 20 percent of its $1.5 billion in funds.

