A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

The Great Depression

in England and the

United States

In a 1954 book, Denis Brogan, a professor at Cambridge University in England,
looked back at the descent into the Great Depression between 1929 and 1932
and explained the signiﬁcance of Franklin Roosevelt’s election from an English
perspective. The second selection is from an oral history conducted in the 1970s
with an ordinary resident of London, who recalled life in the 1930s.

Denis W. Brogan, “From England”

Gladys Gibson, a Resident of London in the 1930s

No event . . . has so colored the European view of the
United States as “the Depression.” The first news of the
crash of 1929 was not ill received. There was not only a
marked feeling of Schadenfreude at the snub that destiny
had given to the overconfident masters of the new world,
but also a widespread belief that the extravagant gambling
of the New York market was one of the chief causes of our
ills. . . . But as the extent, depth, and duration of the Ameri-
can depression began to be appreciated, as its impact on
all the world, especially on the dangerously unstable poli-
tical and economic status quo of Germany and Austria,
became more evident, as the old wound of unemployment
was made to bleed more deeply in Britain, the tendency
to blame the United States became overwhelming. Gone
were the illusions about the “secret of high wages.” If ever
found, it had now been lost.

American politics was seen as not only sterile but pos-
itively immoral and dangerous. . . . American business and
its political arm, the Republican Party, had been tried in
the balance and found wanting. And it is safe to say that
the election of F. D. Roosevelt was welcomed in every
country of Europe as good news almost overshadowing
the nomination of Adolf Hitler as Chancellor of the
German Reich.

Most of the unemployed were genuinely seeking work.
A heavy snowfall was a blessing, when men with broken
boots earned a little money by sweeping the streets. The
Boroughs [a form of local administration in London]
took on unemployed, in strict rotation, for thirteen
weeks of unskilled work. It sometimes put a man back
in benefit and took him off the hated dole. The situation
began to change after Munich, when more men found
work. Salvation came with the War, when the despised
unemployed became valued workers or serving helpers.

Source: Joseph, Franz M., As Others See Us. © 1959 Princeton University Press, 1987
renewed PUP. Reprinted by permission of Princeton University Press.

Nigel Gray, The Worst of Times: An Oral History of the Great Depression in Britain
(Totowa, NJ: Barnes & Noble Books, 1985), 54.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Why would Brogan call the United States “overconﬁdent
masters of the new world”? What are his criticisms of U.S.
economic policy?

2.  How does the testimony of Gladys Gibson about the

“hated dole” compare with what you have learned about
attitudes in the United States in these years?

Like  most  federal  initiatives  under  Hoover,  the  RFC
was not nearly aggressive enough given the severity of
the  depression.  With  federal  officials  fearing  budget
deficits and reluctant to interfere with the private mar-
ket, caution was the order of the day.

Few chief executives could have survived the down-
ward  economic  spiral  of  1929–1932,  but  Hoover’s
reluctance to break with the philosophy of limited gov-
ernment  and  his  insistence  that  recovery  was  always
just around the corner contributed to his unpopularity.

By 1932, Americans perceived Hoover as insensitive to
the  depth  of  the  country’s  economic  suffering.  The
nation had come a long way since the depressions of
the 1870s and 1890s, when no one except the most rad-
ical figures, such as Jacob Coxey, called for direct fed-
eral  aid  to  the  unemployed  (Chapter  20).  Compared
with previous chief executives — and in contrast to his
popular  image  as  a  “do-nothing”  president — Hoover
had responded to the national emergency with unprec-
edented  government  action.  But  the  nation’s  needs

737

