738

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Hooverville

The depression cast hundreds of thousands of Americans out of their homes. Most found shelter with
relatives, but those with little choice had to make do as they could. Encampments such as this one south
of downtown Seattle, Washington — places where the homeless crafted makeshift lodging out of whatever
materials were at hand — became known as Hoovervilles. The name reﬂected Americans’ attitudes toward
Presi dent Hoover, whose popularity plummeted as the depression deepened. University of Washington Libraries,
Special Collections, UW2129.

were even more unprecedented, and Hoover’s programs
failed to meet them (Map 23.1).

Rising Discontent
As the depression deepened, the American vocabulary
now  included  the  terms  Hoovervilles  (shantytowns
where people lived in packing crates) and Hoover blan-
kets (newspapers). Bankrupt farmers banded together
to resist the bank agents and sheriffs who tried to evict
them  from  their  land.  To  protest  low  prices  for  their
goods, in the spring of 1932 thousands of midwestern
farmers  joined  the  Farmers’  Holiday  Association,
which  cut  off  supplies  to  urban  areas  by  barricading
roads and dumping milk, vegetables, and other food-
stuffs  onto  the  roadways.  Agricultural  prices  were  so
low  that  the  Farmers’  Holiday  Association  favored  a
government-supported farm program.

In the industrial sector, layoffs and wage cuts led to
violent  strikes.  When  coal  miners  in  Harlan  County,
Kentucky, went on strike over a 10 percent wage cut in
1931,  the  mine  owners  called  in  the  state’s  National
Guard,  which  crushed  the  union.  A  1932  confronta-
tion between workers and security forces at the Ford
Motor  Company’s  giant  River  Rouge  factory  outside
Detroit  left  five  workers  dead  and  fifty  with  serious
injuries. A photographer had his camera shot from his
hands, and fifteen policemen were clubbed or stoned.
Whether on farms or in factories, those who produced
the  nation’s  food  and  goods  had  begun  to  push  for  a
more  aggressive  response  to  the  nation’s  economic
troubles.

Veterans  staged  the  most  publicized — and  most
tragic — protest.  In  the  summer  of  1932,  the  Bonus
Army, a determined group of 15,000 unemployed World
War  I  veterans,  hitchhiked  to  Washington  to  demand

