CHAPTER 23

  Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939

739

MAP 23.1
The Great Depression: Families on Relief

Although the Great Depression was a
nationwide crisis, some regions were hit
harder than others. Economic hardship was
widespread in the agricultural-based southern
and Appalachian states of the Northeast and
Midwest. As the depression worsened in 1931
and 1932, local and state governments, as well
as charitable organizations, could not keep up
with the demand for relief. After Franklin D.
Roosevelt assumed the presidency in 1933, the
national government began a massive program
of aid through the Federal Emergency Relief
Administration (FERA).

WASH.

OREGON

MONTANA

N. DAK. MINN.

IDAHO

S. DAK.

WYOMING

WIS.

MICH.

NEVADA

CALIF.

UTAH

COLO.

NEBRASKA

IOWA

ILL.

KANSAS

MO.

VT.

ME.

N.Y.

PA.

N.H.
MASS.

R.I.
CONN.

N.J.
DEL.
MD.

ARIZONA

N. MEX.

OKLA.

TEXAS

ARK.

LA.

Percentage of Families
on Relief, 1933

Below 8 percent
8–15 percent
Over 15 percent

IND.

OHIO

KY.

TENN.

W.
VA. VA.

N.C.

S.C.

MISS. ALA.

GA.

FLA.

N

W

E

S

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

immediate payment of pension awards that were due to
be  paid  in  1945.  “We  were  heroes  in  1917,  but  we’re
bums now,” one veteran complained bitterly. While their
leaders  unsuccessfully  lobbied  Congress,  the  Bonus
Army set up camps near the Capitol building. Hoover
called out regular army troops under the command of
General Douglas MacArthur, who forcefully evicted the
marchers  and  burned  their  main  encampment  to  the
ground. When newsreel footage showing the U.S. Army
attacking and injuring veterans reached movie theaters
across  the  nation,  Hoover’s  popularity  plunged.  In
another measure of how the country had changed since
the 1890s, what Americans had applauded when done to
Coxey in 1894 was condemned in 1932.

The 1932 Election
Despite  rising  discontent,  the  national  mood  was
mixed as the 1932 election approached. Many Ameri-
cans  had  internalized  the  ideal  of  the  self-made  man
and blamed themselves for their economic hardships.
Despair, not anger, characterized their mood. Others,
out of work for a year or more, perhaps homeless, felt
the deeper stirrings of frustration and rage. Regardless
of their circumstances, most Americans believed that
something altogether new had to be tried — whatever
that might be. The Republicans, reluctant to dump an
incumbent  president,  unenthusiastically  renominated
Hoover. The Demo crats turned to New York governor
Franklin  Delano  Roosevelt,  whose  state  had  initiated
innovative relief and unemployment programs.

Roosevelt,  born  into  a  wealthy  New  York  family,
was  a  distant  cousin  to  former  president  Theodore

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
What did the depression
look like when seen from
the vantage of ordinary
Americans?

Roosevelt, whose career he emu-
lated.  After  attending  Harvard
College and Columbia University,
Franklin  Roosevelt  served  as
assistant  secretary  of  the  navy
during World War I (as Theodore
Roosevelt  had  done  before  the
War of 1898). Then, in 1921, a crippling attack of polio
left both of his legs permanently paralyzed. Supported
by his wife, Eleanor, he slowly returned to public life
and  campaigned  successfully  for  the  governorship  of
New York in 1928 and again in 1930. Running for the
presidency in 1932, Roosevelt pledged vigorous action
but gave no indication what that action might be, argu-
ing simply that “the country needs and, unless I mis-
take its temper, the country demands bold, persistent
experimentation.” He won easily, receiving 22.8 million
votes to Hoover’s 15.7 million.

Elected in November, Roosevelt would not begin his
presidency until March 1933. (The Twentieth Amend-
ment, ratified in 1933, set subsequent inaugurations for
January 20.) Meanwhile, Americans suffered through
the  worst  winter  of  the  depression.  Unemployment
continued to climb, and in three major industrial cities
in Ohio, it shot to staggering levels: 50 percent in Cleve-
land, 60 percent in Akron, and 80 percent in Toledo.
Private charities and public relief agencies reached only
a  fraction  of  the  needy.  The  nation’s  banking  system
was  so  close  to  collapse  that  many  state  governors
closed banks temporarily to avoid further withdrawals.
Several states  were approaching  bankruptcy,  their  tax
revenues too low to pay for basic services. By March
1933, the nation had hit rock bottom.

