740

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

The New Deal Arrives,
1933–1935
The  ideological  differences  between  Herbert  Hoover
and  Franklin  Roosevelt  were  not  vast.  Both  leaders
wished to maintain the nation’s economic institutions
and  social  values,  to  save  capitalism  while  easing  its
worst downturns. Both believed in a balanced govern-
ment  budget  and  extolled  the  values  of  hard  work,
cooperation,  and  sacrifice.  But  Roosevelt’s  personal
charm, political savvy, and willingness to experiment
made  him  far  more  effective  and  more  popular  than
Hoover. Most Americans felt a kinship with their new
president,  calling  him  simply  FDR.  His  New  Deal
would  put  people  to  work  and  restore  hope  for  the
nation’s future.

Roosevelt and the First Hundred Days
A wealthy patrician, Roosevelt was an unlikely figure
to inspire millions of ordinary Americans. But his close
rapport  with  the  American  people  was  critical  to
his  political  success.  More  than
450,000  letters  poured  into  the
White House in the week after his
inauguration.  The  president’s
masterful use of the new medium
of  radio,  especially  his  evening
radio  addresses  to  the  American
public  known  as  ﬁreside  chats,
made him an intimate presence in
people’s  lives.  Thousands  of  citi-
zens felt a personal relationship with FDR, saying, “He
gave  me  a  job”  or  “He  saved  my  home”  (American
Voices, p. 742).

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What speciﬁc new roles
did the American govern-
ment take up as a result
of the legislation passed
during the ﬁrst hundred
days?

Citing the national economic emergency, Roosevelt
further expanded the presidential powers that Theodore
Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson had increased previ-
ously. To draft legislation and policy, he relied heavily
on  financier  Bernard  Baruch  and  a  “Brains  Trust”  of
professors  from  Columbia,  Har vard,  and  other  lead-
ing universities. Roosevelt also turned to his talented
cabinet,  which  included  Harold  L.  Ickes,  secretary
of  the  interior;  Frances  Perkins  at  the  Labor  Depart-
ment;  Henry  A.  Wallace  at  Agriculture;  and  Henry
Morgenthau Jr., secretary of the treasury. These intellec-
tuals and administrators attracted hundreds of highly
qualified recruits to Washington. Inspired by New Deal
idealism,  many  of  them  would  devote  their  lives
to  public  service  and  the  principles  of  social-welfare
liberalism.

Roosevelt could have done little, however, without
a sympathetic Congress. The 1932 election had swept
Democratic majorities into both the House and Senate,
giving  the  new  president  the  lawmaking  allies  he
needed. The first months of FDR’s administration pro-
duced a whirlwind of activity on Capitol Hill. In a leg-
endary session, known as the Hundred Days, Congress
enacted  fifteen  major  bills  that  focused  primarily  on
four problems: banking failures, agricultural overpro-
duction,  the  business  slump,  and  soaring  unemploy-
ment. Derided by some as an “alphabet soup” because
of their many abbreviations (CCC, WPA, AAA, etc.),
the new policies and agencies were more than bureau-
cracies:  they  represented  the  emergence  of  a  new
Ameri can state.

Banking Reform  The weak banking system hobbled
the entire economy, curtailing consumer spending and
business  investment.  Widespread  bank  failures  had
reduced  the  savings  of  nearly  nine  million  families,
and panicked account holders raced to withdraw their
funds. On March 5, 1933, the day after his inaugura-
tion, FDR declared a national “bank holiday” — closing
all  the  banks — and  called  Congress  into  special  ses-
sion. Four days later, Congress passed the Emergency
Banking  Act,  which  permitted  banks  to  reopen  if  a
Treasury Department inspection showed that they had
sufficient cash reserves.

In  his  first  Sunday  night  fireside  chat,  to  a  radio
audience  of  sixty  million,  the  president  reassured
citizens  that  their  money  was  safe.  When  the  banks
reopened  on  March  13,  calm  prevailed  and  deposits
exceeded withdrawals, restoring stability to the nation’s
basic  financial  institutions.  “Capitalism  was  saved  in
eight  days,”  quipped  Roosevelt’s  advisor  Raymond
Moley.  Four  thousand  banks  had  collapsed  in  the
months  prior  to  Roosevelt’s  inauguration;  only  sixty-
one  closed  their  doors  in  all  of  1934  (Table  23.1).  A
second  banking  law,  the  Glass-Steagall  Act,  further
restored  public  confidence  by  creating  the  Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which insured
deposits  up  to  $2,500  (and  now  insures  them  up  to
$250,000). The act also prohibited banks from making
risky, unsecured investments with the deposits of ordi-
nary people. And in a profoundly important economic
and  symbolic  gesture,  Roosevelt  removed  the  U.S.
Treasury from the gold standard in June 1933, which
allowed  the  Federal  Reserve  to  lower  interest  rates;
since  1931,  it  had  been  raising  rates,  which had  only
deepened the downturn. Saving the banks and leaving
the gold standard led to a mild and, it would turn out,
brief recovery.

