CHAPTER 23

  Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939

741

TABLE 23.1

American Banks and Bank Failures, 1920–1940

Year

1920

1929

1931

1933

1934

1940

Total Number of Banks

Total Assets ($ billion)

Bank Failures

30,909

25,568

22,242

14,771

15,913

15,076

53.1

72.3

70.1

51.4

55.9

79.7

   168

   659

2,294

4,004

     61

     48

SOURCE: Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1975), 1019,
1038–1039.

Agriculture and Manufacturing  Roosevelt and the
New  Deal  Congress  next  turned  to  agriculture  and
manufacturing.  In  those  sectors,  a  seeming  paradox
was  evident:  the  depression  led  to  overproduction  in
agriculture  and  underproduction  in  manufacturing.
Reversing  both  problematic  trends  was  critical.  The
Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) began direct gov-
ernmental regulation of the farm economy for the first
time. To solve the problem of overproduction, which
lowered  prices,  the  AAA  provided  cash  subsidies  to
farmers who cut production of seven major commodi-
ties: wheat, cotton, corn, hogs, rice, tobacco, and dairy
products. Policymakers hoped that farm prices would
rise as production fell.

By  dumping  cash  in  farmers’  hands,  the  AAA
briefly stabilized the farm economy. But the act’s bene-
fits were not evenly distributed. Subsidies went primar-
ily  to  the  owners  of  large  and  medium-sized  farms,
who often cut production by reducing the amount of
land  they  rented  to  tenants  and  sharecroppers.  In
Mississippi,  one  plantation  owner  received  $26,000
from the federal government, while thousands of black
sharecroppers living in the same county received only
a few dollars in relief payments.

In manufacturing, the New Deal attacked declining
production with the National Industrial Recovery Act.
A  new  government  agency,  the  National  Recovery
Admin istration (NRA), set up separate self-governing
private  associations  in  six  hundred  industries.  Each
industry — ranging from large corporations producing
coal, cotton textiles, and steel to small businesses mak-
ing pet food and costume jewelry — regulated itself by
agreeing  on  prices  and  production  quotas.  Because
large  companies  usually  ran  these  associations,  the
NRA solidified their power at the expense of smaller
enterprises and consumer interests.

The AAA and the NRA were designed to rescue the
nation’s  productive  industries  and  stabilize  the  econ-
omy. The measures had positive effects in some regions,
but most historians agree that, overall, they did little to
end the depression.

Unemployment  Relief  The  Roosevelt  administra-
tion next addressed the massive unemployment prob-
lem. By 1933, local governments and private charities
had  exhausted  their  resources  and  were  looking  to
Washington for assistance. Although Roosevelt wanted
to avoid a budget deficit, he asked Congress to provide
relief for millions of unemployed Americans. In May,
Congress  established  the  Federal  Emergency  Relief
Administration (FERA). Directed by Harry Hopkins, a
hard-driving social worker from New York, the FERA
provided federal funds for state relief programs.

Roosevelt  and  Hopkins  had  strong  reservations
about the “dole,” the nickname for government welfare
payments.  As  Hopkins  put  it,  “I  don’t  think  anybody
can  go  year  after  year,  month  after  month,  accepting
relief  without  affecting  his  character.”  To  support  the
traditional values of individualism, the New Deal put
people to work. Early in 1933, Congress established the
Public  Works  Administration  (PWA),  a  construction
program, and several months later, Roosevelt created
the  Civil  Works  Administration  (CWA)  and  named
Hopkins its head. Within thirty days, Hopkins had put
2.6  million  men  and  women  to  work;  at  its  peak  in
1934, the CWA provided jobs for 4 million Americans
repairing bridges, building highways, and constructing
public buildings. A stopgap measure to get the country
through the winter of 1933–1934, the CWA  lapsed in
the  spring,  when  Repub lican  opposition  compelled
New  Deal ers  to  abandon  it.  A  longer-term  program,
the  Civilian  Conservation  Corps  (CCC),  mobilized

