A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Ordinary People

Respond to the

New Deal

Mrs. M. H. A.

Franklin Roosevelt’s ﬁreside chats and his relief programs prompted thousands
of ordinary Americans to write directly to the president and his wife, Eleanor.
Taken together, their letters offer a vivid portrait of depression-era America that
includes popular support for, and opposition to, the New Deal.

Mrs. M. H. A. worked in the County Court House in Eureka,
California.

June 14, 1934
Dear Mrs. Roosevelt:
I know you are overburdened with requests for help and if
my plea cannot be recognized, I’ll understand it is because
you have so many others, all of them worthy. . . .

My husband and I are a young couple of very simple,
almost poor families. We married eight years ago on the
proverbial shoe-string but with a wealth of love. . . . We
managed to build our home and furnish it comfortably. . . .
Then came the depression. My work has continued and
my salary alone has just been sufficient to make our
monthly payments on the house and keep our bills
paid. . . . But with the exception of two and one-half
months work with the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey
under the C.W.A. [Civil Works Administration], my
husband has not had work since August, 1932.

My salary could continue to keep us going, but I am
to have a baby. . . . I can get a leave of absence from my
job for a year. But can’t you, won’t you do something so
my husband can have a job, at least during that year? . . .
As I said before, if it were only ourselves, or if there
were something we could do about it, we would never ask
for help.

I do believe you Will Strain a point to help the ones who
helped you mostly & that is the Working Class of People
I am not smart or I would be in a different line of work
& better up in ever way yet I will know you are the one
& only President that ever helped a Working Class of
People. . . .

I am a White Man American age, 47 married wife
2children in high School am a Finishing room foreman
I mean a Working foreman & am in a furniture Factory
here in Paris Texas where thaire is 175 to 200 Working &
when the NRA [National Recovery Administration] came
in I was Proud to See my fellow workmen Rec 30 Per hour
in Place of 8 cents to 20 cents Per hour. . . .

I can’t see for my life President why a man must toil
&work his life out in Such factories 10 long hours ever
day except Sunday for a small sum of 15 cents to 35 cents
per hour & pay the high cost of honest & deason living
expences. . . .

please see if something can be done to help this one
Class of Working People the factories are a man killer not
venelated or kept up just a bunch of Republickins Grafters
90/100 of them Please help us some way I Pray to God for
relief. I am a Christian . . . and a truthful man & have not
told you wrong & am for you to the end.

[not signed]

We have always stood on our own feet and been proud

R. A.

and happy. But you are a mother and you’ll understand
this crisis.

R. A. was sixty-nine years old and an architect and builder
in Lincoln, Nebraska.

Very sincerely yours,
Mrs. M. H. A.

Unsigned Letter

This unsigned letter came from a factory worker in Paris,
Texas.

November 23, 1936
Dear President,
[N]ow that we have had a land Slide [in the election of
1936] and done just what was best for our country . . .

742

May 19/34
Dear Mrs Roosevelt:
In the Presidents inaugral address delivered from the
capitol steps the afternoon of his inaugration he made
mention of The Forgotten Man, and I with thousands of
others am wondering if the folk who was borned here in
America some 60 or 70 years a go are this Forgotten Man,
the President had in mind, if we are this Forgotten Man
then we are still Forgotten.

We who have tried to be diligent in our support of

this most wonderful nation of ours boath social and

