other wise, we in our younger days tried to do our duty
without complaining. . . .

And now a great calamity has come upon us and
seemingly no cause of our own it has swept away what
little savings we had accumulated and we are left in a
condition that is imposible for us to correct, for two
very prominent reasons if no more.

First we have grown to what is termed Old Age, this

befalls every man.

Second, . . . we are confronted on every hand with the
young generation, taking our places, this of corse is what
we have looked forward to in training our children. But
with the extra ordinary crisese which left us helpless and
placed us in the position that our fathers did not have to
contend with. . . .

We have been honorable citizens all along our jour-

ney, calamity and old age has forced its self upon us
please do not send us to the Poor Farm but instead
allow us the small pension of $40.00 per month. . . .

Mrs. Roosevelt I am asking a personal favor of you
as it seems to be the only means through which I may
be able to reach the President, some evening very soon,
as you and Mr. Roosevelt are having dinner together
privately will you ask him to read this. And we Amer-
ican citizens will ever remember your kindness.

Yours very truly.
R. A.

M. A.

M. A. was a woman who held a low-level salaried position
in a corporation.

Jan. 18, 1937
[Dear Mrs. Roosevelt:]
I . . . was simply astounded to think that anyone could
be nitwit enough to wish to be included in the so called
social security act if they could possibly avoid it. Call it by
any name you wish it, in my opinion, (and that of many
people I know) [it] is nothing but downright stealing. . . .
I am not an “economic royalist,” just an ordinary
white collar worker at $1600 per [year — about $23,600
in 2009]. Please show this to the president and ask him
to remember the wishes of the forgotten man, that is,
the one who dared to vote against him. We expect to be
tramped on but we do wish the stepping would be a little
less hard.

Security at the price of freedom is never desired by

intelligent people.

M. A.

M. A. H.

M. A. H. was a widow who ran a small farm in Columbus,
Indiana.

December 14, 1937
Mrs. Roosevelt:
I suppose from your point of view the work relief, old age
pensions, slum clearance and all the rest seems like a per-
fect remedy for all the ills of this country, but I would like
for you to see the results, as the other half see them.

We have always had a shiftless, never-do-well class of

people whose one and only aim in life is to live without
work. I have been rubbing elbows with this class for
nearly sixty years and have tried to help some of the most
promising and have seen others try to help them, but it
can’t be done. We cannot help those who will not try to
help themselves and if they do try a square deal is all they
need, . . . let each one paddle their own canoe, or sink. . . .
I live alone on a farm and have not raised any crops
for the last two years as there was no help to be had. I am
feeding the stock and have been cutting the wood to keep
my home fires burning. There are several reliefers around
here now who have been kicked off relief but they refuse
to work unless they can get relief hours and wages, but
they are so worthless no one can afford to hire them. . . .
They are just a fair sample of the class of people on whom
so much of our hard earned tax-money is being squan-
dered and on whom so much sympathy is being
wasted. . . .

You people who have plenty of this worlds goods

and whose money comes easy have no idea of the
heart-breaking toil and self-denial which is the lot
of the working people who are trying to make an
honest living, and then to have to shoulder all these
unjust burdens seems like the last straw. . . . No one
should have the right to vote theirself a living at the
expense of the tax payers. . . .

M. A. H.

Sources (in order): Robert S. McElvaine, Down & Out in the Great Depression (Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1983), 54–55; Gerald Markowitz and David
Rosner, eds., “Slaves of the Depression”: Worker’s Letters About Life on the Job (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1987), 21; Robert S. McElvaine, Down & Out in the Great
Depression (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1983), 97, 147, 143.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  How do you explain the personal, almost intimate, tone

of these letters to the Roosevelts?

2.  How have speciﬁc New Deal programs helped or hurt

the authors of these letters?

3.  What are the basic values of the authors? Do the values
of those who support the New Deal differ from the
values of those who oppose it?

743

