744

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Selling the NRA in Chinatown

To mobilize support for its program, the National Recovery Administration (NRA) distributed millions of
posters to businesses and families, urging them to display its symbol, the Blue Eagle, in shops, factories,
and homes. Here Constance King and Mae Chinn of the Chinese YMCA afﬁx a poster (and a Chinese
translation) to a shop in San Francisco that is complying with the NRA codes. © Bettmann/Corbis.

250,000 young men to do reforestation and conserva-
tion  work.  Over  the  course  of  the  1930s,  the  “CCC
boys”  built  thousands  of  bridges,  roads,  trails,  and
other structures in state and national parks, bolstering
the national infrastructure (Map 23.2).

Housing Crisis  Millions of Americans also faced the
devastating  prospect  of  losing  their  homes.  The  eco-
nomic expansion of the 1920s had produced the largest
inflationary  housing  bubble  in  American  history  to
that point, a scenario in which home prices rose wildly,
fueled  by  excessive  borrowing.  In  the  early  1930s,  as

home  prices  collapsed  and  banks  closed,  home  own-
ers  were  dragged  down  with  them.  More  than  half  a
million Americans lost their homes between 1930 and
1932, and in cities such as Cleveland and Indianapo-
lis,  half  of  all  home  mortgage  holders  faced  possible
foreclosure.  In  response,  Congress  created  the  Home
Owners Loan Corporation (HOLC) to refinance home
mortgages. In just two years, the HOLC helped more
than  a  million  Americans  retain  their  homes.  The
Federal  Housing  Act  of  1934  would  extend  this  pro-
gram  under  a  new  agency,  the  Federal  Housing
Administration (FHA). Together, the HOLC, the FHA,

