CHAPTER 23

  Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939

745

North Cascades

WA

Glacier

Olympic

Mount
Rainier

Crater
Lake

OR

Redwood

Lassen
Volcanic

Craters of
the Moon

ID

MT

Yellowstone

Grand Teton

WY

C A N A D A

Voyageurs

Isle
Royale

Pictured Rocks

WI

MI

ND

SD

MN

NV

Yosemite

CA

Kings
Canyon

Sequoia

Death
Valley

Joshua
Tree

Channel
Islands

PACIFIC
OCEAN

Dinosaur

Rocky Mountain

NE

IA

UT

Capitol
Reef

Zion

Grand Canyon

Petrified
Forest
AZ

Mojave
Natonal
Preserve

Saguaro

CO

Canyonlands

Great Sand Dunes

KS

OK

El Malpais
NM

White Sands

Big
Bend

TX

MO

AR

LA

IL

IN

OH

WV

KY

TN
Great Smoky
Mountains

GA

AL

MS

Acadia

ME

RI

NY

VT

NH

MA

CT

PA

MD

NJ

DE

Shenandoah
VA

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

NC

N

W

E

S

0

0

150

300 miles

150

300 kilometers

SC

FL

CCC Camp

U.S. National Park

M E X I C O

Gulf of Mexico

Everglades

MAP 23.2
Civilian Conservation Corps Camps

The Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) gave hope to unemployed young men during the Great
Depression. The ﬁrst camp opened in Big Meadows, Virginia, in July 1933, and by the end of the
decade CCC camps had appeared across the length of the country, located in rural, mountainous,
and forested regions alike. Young men constructed bridges and roads, built hiking trails, erected
public campgrounds, and performed other improvements. By the early 1940s, the CCC had planted
three billion trees, among its many other contributions to the national infrastructure.

and the subsequent Housing Act of 1937 permanently
changed the mortgage system and set the foundation
for  the  broad  expansion  of  home  ownership  in  the
post–World War II decades (Chapter 25).

When  an  exhausted  Congress  recessed  in  June
1933, at the end of the Hundred Days, it had enacted
Roosevelt’s agenda: banking reform, recovery programs
for agriculture and industry, public works, and unem-
ployment relief. Few presidents had won the passage of
so many measures in so short a time. The new federal
agencies were far from perfect and had their critics on
both the radical left and the conservative right. But the
vigorous actions taken by Roosevelt and Congress had
halted  the  downward  economic  spiral  of  the  Hoover
years, stabilized the financial sector, and sent a message
of hope from the nation’s political leaders. For all that,

however, the New Deal did not break the grip of the
depression.

The New Deal Under Attack
As New Dealers waited anxiously for the economy to
revive, Roosevelt turned his attention to the reform of
Wall Street, where reckless speculation and overlever-
aged buying of stocks had helped trigger the financial
panic of 1929. In 1934, Congress established the Secur-
i ties and Exchange Commission (SEC) to regulate the
stock  market.  The  commission  had  broad  powers  to
determine how stocks and bonds were sold to the pub-
lic,  to  set  rules  for  margin  (credit)  transactions,  and
to  prevent  stock  sales  by  those  with  inside  informa-
tion about corporate plans. The  Banking Act of 1935

