746

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

authorized  the  president  to  appoint  a  new  Board  of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, placing con-
trol of interest rates and other money-market policies
in a federal agency rather than in the hands of private
bankers.

Critics  on  the  Right  Such  measures  exposed  the
New Deal to attack from economic conservatives — also
known as the political right. A man of wealth, Roosevelt
saw  himself  as  the  savior  of  American  capitalism,
declaring simply, “To preserve we had to reform.” Many
bankers  and  business  executives  disagreed.  To  them,
FDR became “That Man,” a traitor to his class. In 1934,
Republican  business  leaders  joined  with  conservative
Democrats  in  the  Liberty  League  to  fight  what  they
called  the  “reckless  spending”  and  “socialist”  reforms
of the New Deal. Herbert Hoover condemned the NRA
as  a  “state-controlled  or  state-directed  social  or  eco-
nomic  system.”  That,  declared  the  former  president,
was “tyranny, not liberalism.”

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did critics on the right
and left represent differ-
ent kinds of challenges to
Roosevelt and the New
Deal?

The  National  Association  of
Manufacturers  (NAM)  was  even
more important than the Liberty
League in opposing the New Deal,
as the NAM’s influence stretched
far  into  the  post–World  War  II
decades. Sparked by a new gener-
ation  of  business  leaders  who

believed that a publicity campaign was needed to “serve
the  purposes  of  business  salvation,”  the  NAM  pro-
duced  radio  programs,  motion  pictures,  billboards,
and direct mail in the late 1930s. In response to what
many conservatives perceived as Roosevelt’s antibusi-
ness policies, the NAM promoted free enterprise and
unfettered  capitalism.  After  World  War  II,  the  NAM
emerged  as  a  staunch  critic  of  liberalism  and  forged
alliances with influential conservative politicians such
as Barry Goldwater and Ronald Reagan.

For its part, the Supreme Court repudiated several
cornerstones  of  the  early  New  Deal.  In  May  1935,  in
Schechter v. United States, the Court unanimously ruled
the National Industrial Recovery Act unconstitutional
because  it  delegated  Congress’s  lawmaking  power  to
the  executive  branch  and  extended  federal  authority
to  intrastate  (in  contrast  to  interstate)  commerce.
Roosevelt protested but watched helplessly as the Court
struck down more New Deal legislation: the Agricul-
tural  Adjustment  Act,  the  Railroad  Retire ment  Act,
and a debt-relief law known as the Frazier-Lemke Act.

Critics on the Populist Left
If business leaders and
the  Supreme  Court  thought  that  the  New  Deal  had
gone too far, other Americans believed it had not gone
far enough. Among these were public figures who, in
the  tradition  of  American  populism,  sought  to  place
government  on  the  side  of  ordinary  citizens  against

Father Coughlin

One of the foremost critics of
the New Deal was the “Radio
Priest,” Father Charles E.
Coughlin. Coughlin believed
that Roosevelt and the Demo-
cratic Party had not gone far
enough in their efforts to ensure
the social welfare of all citizens.
For instance, he and his organi-
zation, the National Union for
Social Justice, urged Roosevelt to
nationalize the banks. Coughlin,
whose radio audience reached
30 million at the height of his
popularity, was one of the most
recognizable religious leaders in
the country. Unfortunately, his
remarks in the early 1930s were
often laced with anti-Semitism
(anti-Jewish sentiment).
© Bettmann/Corbis.

