CHAPTER 23

  Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939

747

corporations  and  the  wealthy.  Francis  Townsend,  a
doctor  from  Long  Beach,  California,  spoke  for  the
nation’s  elderly,  most  of  whom  had  no  pensions  and
feared  poverty.  In  1933,  Townsend  proposed  the  Old
Age Revolving Pension Plan, which would give $200 a
month (about $3,300 today) to citizens over the age of
sixty.  To  receive  payments,  the  elderly  would  have  to
retire  and  open  their  positions  to  younger  workers.
Townsend  Clubs  sprang  up  across  the  country  in
support  of  the  Townsend  Plan,  mobilizing  mass  sup-
port for old-age pensions.

The most direct political threat to Roosevelt came
from Louisiana senator Huey Long. As the Democratic
governor  of  Louisiana  from  1928  to  1932,  the  flam-
boyant  Long  had  achieved  stunning  popularity.  He
increased  taxes  on  corporations,  lowered  the  utility
bills of consumers, and built new highways, hospitals,
and  schools.  To  push  through  these  measures,  Long
seized  almost  dictatorial  control  of  the  state  govern-
ment.  Now  a  U.S.  senator,  Long  broke  with  the  New
Deal in 1934 and, like Townsend, established a national
movement. According to his Share Our Wealth Society,
inequalities  in  the  distribution  of  wealth  prohibited
millions of ordinary families from buying goods, which
kept factories humming. Long’s society advocated a tax
of 100 percent on all income over $1 million and on all
inheritances over $5 million. He hoped that this popu-
list program would carry him into the White House.

That  prospect  encouraged  conservatives,  who
hoped that a split between New Dealers and populist
reformers  might  return  the  Republican  Party,  and  its
ideology of limited government and free enterprise, to
political power. In fact, Roosevelt feared that Townsend
and Long, along with the popular “radio priest,” Father
Charles  Coughlin,  might  join  forces  to  form  a  third
party. He had to respond or risk the political unity of
the country’s liberal forces (Map 23.3).

The Second New Deal and the
Redefining of Liberalism,
1935–1938
As attacks on the New Deal increased, Roosevelt and
his  advisors  moved  politically  to  the  left.  Historians
have labeled this shift in policy the Second New Deal.
Roosevelt  now  openly  criticized  the  “money  classes,”
proudly  stating,  “We  have  earned  the  hatred  of
entrenched  greed.”  He  also  decisively  countered  the
rising popularity of Townsend, Coughlin, and Long by

adopting parts of their programs. The administration’s
Revenue  Act  of  1935  proposed  a  substantial  tax
increase  on  corporate  profits  and  higher  income  and
estate  taxes  on  the  wealthy.  When  conservatives
attacked this legislation as an attempt to “soak the rich,”
Congress  moderated  its  taxation  rates.  But  FDR  was
satisfied.  He  had  met  the  Share  Our  Wealth  Society’s
proposal with a tax plan of his own.

The Welfare State Comes into Being
The Revenue Act symbolized the administration’s new
outlook. Unlike the First New Deal, which focused on
economic recovery, the Second New Deal emphasized
social justice and the creation of a safety net: the use of
the  federal  government  to  assist
working  people  and  to  provide
economic security for the old, the
disabled,  and  the  unemployed.
The  resulting  welfare  state — a
term applied to industrial democ-
racies  that  adopted  various  government-guaranteed
social-welfare  programs — fundamentally  changed
American society.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did the Second New
Deal differ from the ﬁrst?

The Wagner Act and Social Security  The first ben-
eficiary of Roosevelt’s Second New Deal was the labor
movement.  Section  7(a)  of  the  National  Industrial
Recovery Act (NIRA) had given workers the right to
organize unions, producing a dramatic growth in rank-
and-file militancy and leading to a strike wave in 1934.
When  the  Supreme  Court  voided  the  NIRA  in  1935,
labor unions called for new legislation that would allow
workers  to  organize  and  bargain  collectively  with
employers.  Named  for  its  sponsor,  Senator  Robert  F.
Wagner of New York, the  Wagner  Act (1935) upheld
the right of industrial workers to join unions. The act
outlawed  many  practices  that  employers  had  used  to
suppress  unions,  such  as  firing  workers  for  organiz-
ing  activities.  It  also  established  the  National  Labor
Relations  Board  (NLRB),  a  federal  agency  with  the
authority to protect workers from employer coercion
and to guarantee collective bargaining.

A second initiative, the Social Security Act of 1935,
had  an  equally  widespread  impact.  Other  industrial-
ized  societies,  such  as  Germany  and  Britain,  had
created national old-age pension systems at the turn of
the  century,  but  American  reformers  had  failed  to
secure a similar program in the United States. The Town-
s end and Long movements now pressed Roosevelt to
act,  giving  political  muscle  to  pension  proponents
within the administration. Children’s welfare advocates,

