748

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Seattle’s Unemployed
Citizen’s League, 1930–31

N

W

S

WASH.

OREGON

E

C A N A D A

Sit-down strike at
General Motors,
Flint, 1936–37

Communist-led "Ford Hunger
March," Dearborn, 1932

MONTANA

NORTH
DAKOTA

MINN.

Milk strikes,
Wisconsin, 1933

Bonus Army march begins
in Portland, 1932

IDAHO

WYOMING

SOUTH
DAKOTA

Sit-down strike at
Chrysler, Detroit,
1937

Father Charles
Coughlin, the
"Radio Priest,"
organizes the
National Union
for Social Justice,
1934

Progressive Party
launched, Madison,
1934

WIS.

MICH.

Sioux City farmers’
strike, 1932

NEBRASKA

IOWA

NEVADA

UTAH

COLORADO

Strike at Republic
Steel, Chicago, 1937

ILL.

IND.

Dr. Francis Townsend proposes
an "Old Age Revolving Pension"
and organizes Townsend Clubs
with the slogan, "$200 a month
at sixty," 1933–34

ARIZONA

NEW
MEXICO

KANSAS

MO.

Sit-down strike at General
Motors, Kansas City, 1936

OKLAHOMA

Strike at General
Motors, Anderson,
1937

ARK.

TENN.

S.C.

OHIO
General strike,
Toledo, 1934
W.
VA.

KY.

Farm workers begin organizing,
California, 1933

CALIF.

San Francisco
general strike, 1934

Los Angeles cannery
strike (women), 1939

Housewives’ meat strikes
Los Angeles, 1935.  Strikes
and demonstrations also
in New York, Detroit,
Denver, and Miami, 1935

Strike at General
Motors, Cleveland,
1936

Sit-down strike, rubber
workers, Akron, 1936

N.H.

VT.

N.Y.

ME.

Textile strike,
Lawrence, 1934

MASS.

R.I.
CONN.

N.J.

100,000 participate
in leftist demon-
stration in New
York City, 1930

DEL.
MD.
National Negro Congress
organizes tobacco strike,
Richmond, 1935

Kentucky miners’ strike, 1931

VA.

N.C.

PA.
RCA strike,
Camden, 1936

Southern Tenant Farmers’
Union leads marching strikes
against cotton planters, 1935–36

MISS.

TEXAS

LA.

ALA.

GA.

Strike at General Motors,
Atlanta, 1936

Alabama Sharecroppers Union
organized, 1931

FLA.

A T L A N T I C
O C E A N

Upton Sinclair, leader of End
Poverty in California, wins
Democratic primary for
governor but loses election, 1934

P A C I F I C
O C E A N

Strike, demonstration, or protest
Political action

ILGWU garment workers
strike in San Antonio (women),
1937

M E X I C O

0

0

Huey Long, governor of Louisiana,
1928–31, United States senator,
1931–35, launches national
Share-Our-Wealth Society, 1934

Gulf of Mexico

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

MAP 23.3
Popular Protest in the Great Depression, 1933–1939

The depression forced Americans to look closely at their society, and many of them did not like
what they saw. Some citizens expressed their discon tent through pop ular movements, and this
map suggests the geography of discontent. The industrial Midwest witnessed union movements,
strikes, and Radio Priest Charles Coughlin’s demands for social reform. Simultaneously, farmers’
movements — tenants in the South, smallholders in the agricultural Midwest — engaged in strikes
and dumping campaigns and rallied behind the ideas of progressives in Wisconsin and Huey Long
in the South. Protests took diverse forms in California, which was home to strikes by farmworkers,
women, and — in San Francisco — all wageworkers. The West was also the seedbed of two impor-
tant reform pro posals: Upton Sinclair’s End Poverty in California (EPIC) movement and Francis
Townsend’s Old Age Revolving Pension clubs.

concerned  about  the  fate  of  fatherless  families,  also
pressured the president. The resulting Social Security
Act  had  three  main  provisions:  old-age  pensions  for
workers; a joint federal-state system of compensation
for unemployed workers; and a program of payments
to widowed mothers and the blind, deaf, and disabled.
Roosevelt, however, limited the reach of the legislation.
Knowing that compulsory pension and unemployment
legislation alone would be controversial, he dropped a
provision  for  national  health  insurance,  fearing  it
would doom the entire bill.

The  Social  Security  Act  was  a  milestone  in  the
creation  of  an  American  welfare  state.  Never  before
had  the  federal  government  assumed  such  responsi-
bility  for  the  well-being  of  so  many  citizens.  Social
Security,  as  old-age  pensions  were  known,  became
one  of  the  most  popular  government  programs  in
American  history.  On  the  other  hand,  the  assistance
program  for  widows  and  children  known  as  Aid  to
Dependent  Children  (ADC)  became  one  of  its  most
controversial  measures.  ADC  covered  only  700,000
youngsters  in  1939;  by  1994,  its  successor,  Aid  to

