CHAPTER 23

  Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939

749

United Auto Workers
Strike

Trade unions were among
the most active and vocal
organizations of the 1930s.
Organized labor led a num-
ber of major strikes between
1934 and 1936 in various
industries. None was more
important to the future
of trade unions than the
sit-down strikes at major
automobile plants, includ-
ing General Motors and
Chevrolet in Flint, Michigan,
in 1936 and 1937. These
strikes, in which workers
stopped the assembly lines
but refused to leave the fac-
tories, compelled GM to
recognize the United Auto
Workers (UAW), which
became one of the strongest
trade unions in American his-
tory. © Bettmann/Corbis.

Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), enrolled
14.1 million Americans. A minor program during the
New Deal, AFDC grew enormously in the 1960s and
remained  an  often  maligned  cornerstone  of  the  wel-
fare  state  until  it  was  eliminated  under  President
Clinton in 1996.

New  Deal  Liberalism  The  Second  New  Deal
created  what  historians  call  New  Deal  liberalism.
Classi cal  liberalism  held  individual  liberty  to  be  the
foundation  of  a  democratic  society,  and  the  word
liberal  had  traditionally  denoted  support  for  free-
market policies and weak government. Roosevelt and
his  advisors,  along  with  intellectuals  such  as  British
economist  John  Maynard  Keynes,  disagreed.  They
countered that, to preserve individual liberty, govern-
ment  must  assist  the  needy  and  guarantee  the  basic
welfare  of  citizens.  This  liberal  welfare  state  was
opposed  by  inheritors  of  the  nineteenth-century
ideology  of  laissez-faire  capitalism,  who  gradually
became known as conservatives. These two visions of
liberty  and  government — with  liberals  on  one  side
and conservatives on the other — would shape Ameri-
can politics for the next half century.

From Reform to Stalemate
Roosevelt’s first term had seen an extraordinary expan-
sion of the federal state. The great burst of government
action  between  1933  and  1935  was  unequaled  in  the
nation’s  history  (though  Congress  and  President
Lyndon Johnson nearly matched it in 1965–1966; see
Chapter  28).  Roosevelt’s  second  term,  however,  was
characterized by a series of political entanglements and
economic bad news that stifled further reform.

The  1936  Election  FDR  was  never  enthusiastic
about public relief programs. But with the election of
1936 on the horizon and 10 million Americans still out
of  work,  he  won  funding  for  the  Works  Progress
Administration (WPA). Under the energetic direction
of  Harry  Hopkins,  the  WPA  employed  8.5  million
Americans between 1935, when it was established, and
1943.  The  agency’s  workers  constructed  or  repaired
651,087 miles of road, 124,087 bridges, 125,110 public
buildings, 8,192 parks, and 853 airports. But although
the WPA was an extravagant operation by 1930s stan-
dards, it reached only about one-third of the nation’s
unemployed.

