750

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

As the 1936 election approached, new voters joined
the Democratic Party. Many had personally benefitted
from  New  Deal  programs  such  as  the  WPA  or  knew
people  who  had  (Table  23.2).  One  was  Jack  Reagan,
a  down-on-his-luck  shoe  salesman  (and  the  father
of  future  president  Ronald  Reagan),  who  took  a  job
as  a  federal  relief  administrator  in  Dixon,  Illinois,
and  became  a  strong  supporter  of  the  New  Deal.  In

TABLE 23.2

Major New Deal Legislation

Agriculture

1933

Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA)

Resettlement Administration (RA)
Rural Electriﬁcation Administration

1935

1937

Farm Security Administration (FSA)

1938

Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938

Finance and Industry

1933

Emergency Banking Act
Glass-Steagall Act (created the FDIC)
National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA)

1934

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)

1935

Banking Act of 1935
Revenue Act (wealth tax)

Conservation and the Environment

1933

Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)
Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC)
Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment
Act

Labor and Social Welfare

1933

Section 7(a) of NIRA

1935

National Labor Relations Act (Wagner Act)
National Labor Relations Board (NLRB)
Social Security Act

1937

National Housing Act

1938

Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)

Relief and Reconstruction

1933

Federal Emergency Relief Administration
(FERA)
Civil Works Administration (CWA)
Public Works Administration (PWA)

1935 Works Progress Administration (WPA)
National Youth Administration (NYA)

addition  to  voters  such  as  Reagan,  Roosevelt  could
count on a powerful coalition of organized labor, mid-
western farmers, white ethnic groups, northern African
Ameri cans, and middle-class families concerned about
unem ployment  and  old-age  security.  He  also  com-
manded  the  support  of  intellectuals  and  progressive
Republicans. With difficulty, the Democrats held on to
the votes of their white southern constituency as well.
Republicans recognized that the New Deal was too
popular to oppose directly, so they chose as their can-
didate the progressive governor of Kansas, Alfred M.
Landon. Landon accepted the legitimacy of many New
Deal  programs  but  criticized  their  inefficiency  and
expense.  He  also  pointed  to  authoritarian  regimes  in
Italy and Germany and hinted that FDR harbored sim-
ilar  dictatorial  ambitions.  These  charges  fell  on  deaf
ears. Roosevelt’s victory in 1936  was one of the most
lopsided  in  American  history.  The  assassination  of
Huey Long by a Louisiana political rival in September
1935 had eliminated the threat of a serious third-party
challenge. Roosevelt received 60 percent of the popular
vote and carried every state except Maine and Vermont.
Organized labor, in particular, mobilized on behalf of
FDR,  donating  money,  canvassing  door  to  door,  and
registering hundreds of thousands of new voters. The
New Republic, a liberal publication, boasted that “it was
the greatest revolution in our political history.”

“I see one-third of a nation ill-housed, ill-clad, ill-
nourished,” the president declared in his second inau-
gural address in January 1937. But any hopes that FDR
had for expanding the liberal welfare state were quickly
dashed. Within a year, staunch opposition to Roosevelt’s
initiatives  arose  in  Congress,  and  a  sharp  recession
undermined confidence in his economic leadership.

Court Battle and Economic Recession  Roosevelt’s
first setback in 1937 came when he surprised the nation
by  asking  for  fundamental  changes  to  the  Supreme
Court. In 1935, the Court had struck down a series of
New  Deal  measures  by  the  narrow  margin  of  5  to  4.
With the Wagner Act, the Tennessee Valley Authority,
and Social Security all slated to come before the Court,
the future of the New Deal rested in the hands of a few
elderly, conservative-minded judges. To diminish their
influence, the president proposed adding a new justice
to the Court for every member over the age of seventy,
a  scheme  that  would  have  brought  six new  judges  to
the  bench  at  the  time  the  legislation  was  proposed.
Roosevelt’s opponents protested that he was trying to
“pack”  the  Court.  After  a  bitter,  months-long  debate,
Congress rejected this blatant attempt to alter the judi-
ciary to the president’s advantage.

