CHAPTER 23

  Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939

751

If Roosevelt lost the battle, he went on to win the
war.  Swayed  in  part  by  the  president’s  overwhelming
electoral victory in the 1936 election, the Court upheld
the Wagner and Social Security Acts. Moreover, a series
of timely resignations allowed Roosevelt to reshape the
Supreme  Court  after  all.  His  new  appointees — who
included  the  liberal-leaning  and  generally  pro–New
Deal  Hugo  Black,  Felix  Frankfurter,  and  William  O.
Douglas — viewed the Constitution as a “living docu-
ment” that had to be interpreted in the light of present
conditions.

The  so-called  Roosevelt  recession  of  1937–1938
dealt another blow to the president. From 1933 to 1937,
gross domestic product had grown at a  yearly rate of
about  10  percent,  bringing  industrial  output  back  to
1929 levels. Unemployment had declined from 25 per-
cent  to  14  percent.  “The  emergency  has  passed,”
declared  Senator  James  F.  Byrnes  of  South  Carolina.
Acting on this assumption, Roosevelt slashed the fed-
eral  budget.  Following  the  president’s  lead,  Congress
cut the WPA’s funding in half, causing layoffs of about
1.5 million workers, and the Federal Reserve, fearing
inflation,  raised  interest  rates.  These  measures  halted
recovery.  The  stock  market  responded  by  dropping
sharply,  and  unemployment  jumped  to  19  percent.
Quickly reversing course, Roosevelt began once again
to spend his way out of the recession by boosting fund-
ing for the WPA and resuming public works projects.

Although  improvised,  this  spending  program
accorded with the theories of John Maynard Keynes, a
visionary British economist. Keynes transformed eco-
nomic thinking in capitalist societies in the 1920s  by
arguing  that  government  intervention  could  smooth
out the highs and lows of the business cycle through
deficit spending and the manipulation of interest rates,
which  determined  the  money  supply.  This  view  was
sharply  criticized  by  Republicans  and  conservative
Democrats  in  the  1930s,  who  disliked  government
intervention in the economy. But Keynesian econom-
ics  gradually  won  wider  acceptance  as  World  War  II
defense spending finally ended the Great Depression.

A reformer rather than a revolutionary, Roosevelt
had preserved capitalism and liberal individualism —
even as he transformed them in significant ways. At the
same time, conservatives had reclaimed a measure of
power in Congress, and those who believed the New
Deal had created an intrusive federal bureaucracy kept
reform  in  check  after  1937.  Throughout  Roosevelt’s
second  term,  a  conservative  coalition  of  southern
Democrats, rural Republicans, and industrial interests
in both parties worked to block or impede social legis-
lation. By 1939, the era of change was over.

The New Deal’s Impact
on Society
Whatever its limits, the New Deal had a tremendous
impact. Its ideology of social-welfare liberalism funda-
mentally altered Americans’ relationship to their gov-
ernment  and  provided  assistance  to  a  wide  range  of
ordinary people: the unemployed, the elderly, workers,
and the poor. In doing so, New Dealers created a siz-
able federal bureaucracy: the number of civilian federal
employees increased by 80 percent between 1929 and
1940,  reaching  a  total  of  1  million.  The  expendi-
tures — and deficits — of the federal government grew
at an even faster rate. In 1930, the Hoover administra-
tion spent $3.1 billion and had a surplus of almost $1
billion;  in  1939,  New  Dealers  expended  $9.4  billion
and ran a deficit of nearly $3 billion (still small by later
standards). But the New Deal represented more than
figures on a balance sheet. Across the country, the new
era in government inspired democratic visions among
ordinary citizens (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 752).

A People’s Democracy
In  1939,  writer  John  La  Touche  and  musician  Earl
Robinson  produced  “Ballad  for  Americans.”  A  patri-
otic  song,  it  called  for  uniting  “everybody  who’s
nobody . . . Irish,  Negro,  Jewish,  Italian,  French,  and
English,  Spanish,  Russian,  Chinese,  Polish,  Scotch,
Hungarian, Litvak, Swedish, Finnish, Canadian, Greek,
and  Turk,  and  Czech  and  double  Czech  American.”
The song captured the democratic aspirations that the
New Deal had awakened. Millions of ordinary people
believed  that  the  nation  could,  and  should,  become
more egalitarian. Influenced by the liberal spirit of the
New Deal, Americans from all walks of life seized the
opportunity  to  push  for  change  in  the  nation’s  social
and political institutions.

Organized  Labor  Demoralized and shrinking dur-
ing  the  1920s,  labor  unions  increased  their  numbers
and clout during the New Deal, thanks to the Wagner
Act. “The era of privilege and predatory individuals is
over,” labor leader John L. Lewis declared. By the end
of the decade, the number of unionized workers had
tripled to 23 percent of the nonagricultural workforce.
A  new  union  movement,  led  by  the  Congress  of
Industrial Organizations (CIO), promoted “industrial
unionism” — organizing all the workers in an industry,
from  skilled  machinists  to  unskilled  janitors,  into  a
single union. The American Federation of Labor (AFL),

