T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

The New Deal and

Public Works

More than half a dozen New Deal programs were devoted to building up the
physical and cultural infrastructure of the country. The former included roads,
bridges,  dams,  trails,  and  national  parks.  The  latter  included  artwork,  murals,
plays, and other forms of literary expression. Examine the following documents
and use them collectively to analyze the New Deal’s relationship to infrastruc-
ture, art, culture, and politics.

1.  Harold L. Ickes, secretary of the interior, The New

3.  Federal Writers’ Project interview with a WPA

Democracy, 1934.

Our Government is no longer a laissez-faire Government,
exercising traditional and more or less impersonal pow-
ers. There exists in Washington a sense of responsibility
for the health, safety, and well-being of the people. . . .
I believe that we are at the dawn of a day when the aver-
age man, woman, and child in the United States will have
an opportunity for a happier and richer life. And it is just
and desirable that this should be so. . . . We are not here
merely to endure a purgatorial existence in anticipation
of a beatific eternity after the grave closes on us. We are
here with hopes and aspirations and legitimate desires
that we are entitled to have satisfied to at least a reason-
able degree. Nor will such a social program as we are
discussing cause a strain on our economic system.

2.  Herbert Johnson cartoon, Saturday Evening Post,

1935.

draftsman, Newburyport, Massachusetts, June 25,
1939.

One reason people here don’t like the WPA is because
they don’t understand it’s not all bums and drunks and
aliens! Nobody ever explains to them that they’d never
have had the new High School they’re so [. . .] proud of
if it hadn’t been for the WPA. They don’t stop to figure
that new brick sidewalks wouldn’t be there, the shade
trees wouldn’t be all dressed up to look at along High
Street and all around town, if it weren’t for WPA projects.
To most in this town, and I guess it’s not much different in
this, than any other New England place, WPA’s just a racket,
set up to give a bunch of loafers and drunks steady pay to
indulge in their vices! They don’t stop to consider that on
WPA are men and women who have traveled places and
seen things, been educated and found their jobs folded
up and nothing to replace them with.

The Granger Collection, New York.

752

