4.  Ben Shahn, WPA mural, 1938. This is part of a
three-panel mural commissioned by the Works
Progress Administration (WPA) and painted at a
public school in Roosevelt, New Jersey, by the
well-known artist Ben Shahn.

Courtesy of Roosevelt Arts Project/Picture Research Consultants & Archives

5.  David E. Lilienthal, TVA: Democracy on the

March, 1944. Written by the former chairman
of the Tennessee Valley Authority.

I believe men may learn to work in harmony with the
forces of nature, neither despoiling what God has given
nor helpless to put them to use. I believe in the great
potentialities for well-being of the machine and technol-
ogy and science; and though they do hold a real threat of
enslavement and frustration for the human spirit, I believe
those dangers can be averted. I believe that through the
practice of democracy the world of technology holds out
the greatest opportunity in all history for the development
of the individual, according to his own talents, aspirations,
and willingness to carry the responsibilities of a free
man. . . .

Such are the things that have happened in the Tennes-
see Valley. Here men and science and organizational skills
applied to the resources of waters, land, forests, and min-
erals have yielded great benefits for the people. And it is
just such fruits of technology and resources that people
all over the world will, more and more, demand for them-
selves. That people believe these things can be theirs — this
it is that constitutes the real revolution of our time, the
dominant political fact of the generation that lies ahead.

Sources: (1) Harold L. Ickes, The New Democracy (New York: W. W. Norton &
Company Inc., 1934), 60–61; (3) Federal Writers’ Project Life Histories, Library of
Congress, lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/wpaintro/wpahome.html; (5) David E. Lilienthal,
TVA: Democracy on the March (New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1944), xxii, 3.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  What sorts of reasons do the authors of sources 1 and
5 give for supporting New Deal programs? What does
the “good life” look like in their view, and how is it con-
nected to the New Deal?

2.  What do sources 2 and 3 suggest about possible opposi-
tion to New Deal programs? What sorts of public bur-
dens do New Deal opponents envision?

3.  Consider source 4. What can we learn from a mural

about the spirit of the New Deal? Identity speciﬁc ele-
ments of the mural and think about what they might
signify about the society the muralist envisioned. What
kind of faith in the federal government does the mural
reveal?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Using evidence from the sources in this feature, alongside
material from the chapter and from your knowledge of the
period, write an essay in which you analyze Americans’ atti-
tudes toward New Deal public works projects. If they were
positive or optimistic, what was the basis of their optimism?
If they were critical, what was the basis of their criticism?
From these sources, can you identify a governing spirit of
New Deal reform?

753

