754

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

representing the other major group of unions, favored
organizing workers on a craft-by-craft basis. Both fed-
erations  dramatically  increased  their  membership  in
the second half of the 1930s.

Labor’s new vitality translated into political action
and a long-lasting alliance with the Democratic Party.
The CIO helped fund Democratic campaigns in 1936,
and  its  political  action  committee  became  a  major
Democratic contributor during the 1940s. These suc-
cesses were real but limited. The labor movement did
not  become  the  dominant  force  in  the  United  States
that  it  was  in  Europe,  and  unions  never  enrolled  a
majority of American wageworkers. Antiunion employer
groups  such  as  the  National  Association  of  Manu-
facturers  and  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  remained
powerful  forces  in  American  business  life.  After  a
decade of gains, organized labor remained an impor-
tant, but secondary, force in American industry.

Women and the New Deal  Because policymakers
saw the depression primarily as a crisis of male bread-
winners, the New Deal did not directly challenge gen-
der inequities. New Deal measures generally enhanced
women’s welfare, but few addressed their specific needs
and concerns. However, the Roosevelt administration
did welcome women into the higher ranks of govern-
ment.  Frances  Perkins,  the  first  woman  named  to  a
cabinet  post,  served  as  secretary  of  labor  throughout
Roosevelt’s  presidency.  While  relatively  few,  female
appointees often worked to open up other opportuni-
ties in government for talented women.

The most prominent woman in American politics
was  the  president’s  wife,  Eleanor  Roosevelt.  In  the
1920s, she had worked to expand positions for women
in political parties, labor unions, and education. A tire-
less  advocate  for  women’s  rights,  during  her  years  in
the White House Mrs. Roosevelt emerged as an inde-
pendent  public  figure  and  the  most  influential  First
Lady  in  the  nation’s  history.  Descending  into  coal
mines  to  view  working  conditions,  meeting  with
African  Americans  seeking  antilynching  laws,  and
talking to people on breadlines, she became the con-
science  of  the  New  Deal,  pushing  her  husband  to  do
more  for  the  disadvantaged.  “I  sometimes  acted  as  a
spur,” Mrs. Roosevelt later reflected, “even though the
spurring  was  not  always  wanted
or welcome.”

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
What aspects of the New
Deal inspired ordinary
Americans? What stymied
their ambitions?

Without  the  intervention  of
Eleanor
Frances
Roosevelt,
Perkins,  and  other  prominent
women,  New  Deal  policymakers
would  have  largely  ignored  the

Roosevelts Visit Camp Tara

Franklin Roosevelt was a wealthy patrician, but one of his
great political skills was the ability to connect with ordinary
Americans. His wife, Eleanor, shared a similar gift, perhaps to
an even greater degree. In an era when staged photographs
had become an important part of a politician’s image-making,
Roosevelt made certain to appear frequently in settings in
which he mingled with the public. Here, he and Eleanor visit
a vocational training camp for jobless women in 1934; FDR
is seated on the far left while Eleanor greets two women
standing beside the car. AP/Wide World Photos.

needs  of  women.  A  fourth  of  the  National  Recovery
Act’s employment rules set a lower minimum wage for
women  than  for  men  performing  the  same  jobs,  and
only 7 percent of the workers hired by the Civil Works
Administration were female. The Civilian Conservation
Corps excluded  women entirely. Women fared better
under the Works Progress Administration; at its peak,
405,000 women were on the payroll. Most Americans
agreed  with  such  policies.  When  Gallup  pollsters  in
1936 asked people whether wives should work outside
the  home  when  their  husbands  had  jobs,  82  percent
said no. Such sentiment reflected a persistent belief in
women’s secondary status in American economic life.

African Americans  Under  the  New  Deal  Across
the  nation,  but  especially  in  the  South,  African
Americans held the lowest-paying jobs and faced harsh
social  and  political  discrimination.  Though  FDR  did
not  fundamentally  change  this  fact,  he  was  the  most
popular  president  among  African  Americans  since
Abraham Lincoln. African Americans held 18 percent
of WPA jobs, although they constituted 10 percent of
the  population.  The  Resettlement  Administration,
established in 1935 to help small farmers and tenants
buy land, actively protected the rights of black tenant

