CHAPTER 23

  Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939

755

farmers. Black involvement in the New Deal, however,
could not undo centuries of racial subordination, nor
could it change the overwhelming power of southern
whites in the Democratic Party.

Nevertheless, black Americans received significant
benefits from New Deal relief programs and believed
that the White House cared about their plight, which
caused a momentous shift in their political allegiance.
Since  the  Civil  War,  black  voters  had  staunchly  sup-
ported  the  Republican  Party,  the  party  of  Abraham
Lincoln, known as the Great Emancipator. Even in the
depression  year  of  1932,  they  overwhelmingly  sup-
ported Repub lican candidates. But in 1936, as part of
the tidal wave of national support for FDR, northern
African Ameri cans gave Roosevelt 71 percent of their
votes and have remained solidly Democratic ever since.
African Americans supported the New Deal partly
because  the  Roosevelt  administration  appointed  a
number of black people to federal office, and an infor-
mal  “black  cabinet”  of  prominent  African  American
intellectuals  advised  New  Deal  agencies.  Among  the
most
important  appointees  was  Mary  McLeod
Bethune.  Born  in  1875  in  South  Carolina  to  former
slaves,  Bethune  founded  Bethune-Cookman  College
and  served  during  the  1920s  as  president  of  the
National  Association  of  Colored  Women.  She  joined
the  New  Deal  in  1935,  confiding  to  a  friend  that  she
“believed in the democratic and humane program” of
FDR.  Americans,  Bethune  observed,  had  to  become
“accustomed to seeing Negroes in high places.” Bethune
had access to the White House and pushed continually
for New Deal programs to help African Americans.

But  the  New  Deal  was  limited  in  its  approach  to
race. Roosevelt did not go further in support of black
rights, because of both his own racial blinders and his
need for the votes of the white southern Democrats in
Congress — including  powerful  southern  senators,
many  of  whom  held  influential  committee  posts  in
Congress. Most New Deal programs reflected prevail-
ing racial attitudes. Roosevelt and other New Dealers
had  to  trim  their  proposals  of  measures  that  would
substantially  benefit  African  Americans.  Civilian
Conservation  Corps  camps  segregated  blacks,  and
most  NRA  rules  did  not  protect  black  workers  from
discrimination.  Both  Social  Security  and  the  Wagner
Act  explicitly  excluded  the  domestic  and  agricultural
jobs  held  by  most  African  Americans  in  the  1930s.
Roosevelt  also  refused  to  support  legislation  making
lynching  a  federal  crime,  which  was  one  of  the  most
pressing demands of African Americans in the 1930s.
Between  1882  and  1930,  more  than  2,500  African
Americans were lynched by white mobs in the southern

states, which means that statistically, one man, woman,
or child was murdered every week for fifty years. But
despite  pleas  from  black  leaders,  and  from  Mrs.
Roosevelt  herself,  FDR  feared  that  southern  white
Democrats would block his other reforms in retaliation
for such legislation.

If lynching embodied southern lawlessness, south-
ern law was not much better. In an infamous 1931 case
in  Scottsboro,  Alabama,  nine  young  black  men  were
accused of rape by two white women hitching a ride on
a  freight  train.  The  women’s  stories  contained  many
inconsistencies, but within weeks a white jury had con-
victed all nine defendants; eight received the death sen-
tence.  After  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court  overturned  the
sentences  because  the  defendants  had  been  denied
adequate legal counsel, five of the men were again con-
victed and sentenced to long prison terms. Across the
country,  the  Scottsboro  Boys,  as  they  were  known,
inspired solidarity within African American commu-
nities. Among whites, the Communist Party took the
lead in publicizing the case — and was one of the only
white organizations to do so — helping to support the
Scottsboro  Defense  Committee,  which  raised  money
for legal efforts on the defendants’ behalf.

In southern agriculture, where many sharecroppers
were black while landowners and government admin-
istrators were white, the Agricultural Adjustment Act
hurt rather than helped the poorest African Americans.
landowners  collected  government  subsidy
White
checks  but  refused  to  distribute  payments  to  their
sharecroppers.  Such  practices  forced  200,000  black
families off the land. Some black farmers tried to pro-
tect themselves by joining the Southern Tenant Farmers
Union  (STFU),  a  biracial  organization  founded  in
1934. “The same chain that holds you holds my people,
too,” an elderly black farmer reminded his white neigh-
bors.  But  landowners  had  such  economic  power  and
such support from local sheriffs that the STFU could
do little.

A generation of African American leaders came of
age  inspired  by  the  New  Deal’s  democratic  promise.
But it remained just a promise. From the outset, New
Dealers  wrestled  with  potentially  fatal  racial  politics.
Franklin Roosevelt and the Democratic Party depended
heavily on white voters in the South, who were deter-
mined  to  maintain  racial  segregation  and  white
supremacy.  But  many  Democrats  in  the  North  and
West — centers of New Deal liberalism — would come
to oppose racial discrimination. This meant, ironically,
that the nation’s most liberal political forces and some
of its most conservative political forces existed side by
side  in  the  same  political  party.  Another  thirty  years

