756

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Scottsboro Defendants

The 1931 trial in Scottsboro, Alabama, of
nine black youths accused of raping two
white women became a symbol of the
injustices African Americans faced in the
South’s legal system. Denied access to an
attorney, the defendants were found guilty
after a three-day trial, and eight were sen-
tenced to death. When the U.S. Supreme
Court overturned their convictions in
1932, the International Labor Defense
Organization hired noted criminal attor-
ney Samuel Leibowitz to argue the case.
Leibowitz eventually won the acquittal of
four defendants and jail sentences for the
rest. This 1933 photograph, taken in a
Decatur jail, shows Leibowitz conferring
with Haywood Patterson, in front of the
other eight defendants. Brown Brothers.

would  pass  before  black  Americans  would  gain  an
opportunity to reform U.S. racial laws and practices.

Indian Policy  New Deal reformers seized the oppor-
tunity to implement their vision for the future of Native
Americans,  with  mixed  results.  Indian  peoples  had
long been one of the nation’s most disadvantaged and
powerless  groups.  In  1934,  the  average  individual
Indian income was only $48 per year, and the Native
American  unemployment  rate  was  three  times  the
national average. The plight of Native Americans won
the  attention  of  the  progressive  commissioner  of  the
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), John Collier, an intel-
lectual and critic of past BIA practices. Collier under-
stood what Native Americans had long known: that the
government’s  decades-long  policy  of  forced  assimila-
tion, prohibition of Indian religions, and confiscation
of Indian lands had left most tribes poor, isolated, and
without basic self-determination.

Collier helped to write and push through Congress
the  Indian  Reorganization  Act  of  1934,  sometimes

called the Indian New Deal. On the positive side, the
law  reversed  the  Dawes  Act  of  1887  (Chapter  16)  by
promoting  Indian  self-government  through  formal
constitutions  and  democratically  elected  tribal  coun-
cils. A majority of Indian peoples — some 181 tribes —
accepted the reorganization policy, but 77 declined to
participate, primarily because they preferred the tradi-
tional  way  of  making  decisions  by  consensus  rather
than  by  majority  vote. Through  the  new  law,  Indians
won a greater degree of religious freedom, and tribal
governments  regained  their  status  as  semisovereign
dependent nations. When the latter policy was upheld
by the courts, Indian people gained a measure of lever-
age  that  would  have  major  implications  for  native
rights in the second half of the twentieth century.

Like  so  many  other  federal  Indian  policies,  how-
ever,  the  “Indian  New  Deal”  was  a  mixed  blessing.
For  some  peoples,  the  act  imposed  a  model  of  self-
government  that  proved  incompatible  with  tribal
traditions  and  languages.  The  Papagos  of  southern
Arizona,  for  instance,  had  no  words  for  budget  or

