CHAPTER 23

  Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939

757

Indian New Deal

Commissioner of Indian Affairs John Collier poses with chiefs of the Blackfoot Indian tribe in 1934. Collier
helped reform the way the U.S. federal government treated Native Americans. As part of what many called
the Indian New Deal, Collier lobbied Congress to pass the Indian Reorganization Act. The act gave Indian
tribes greater control over their own affairs and ended many of the most atrocious federal practices, such
as forcing Indian children into white-run boarding schools and dividing up and selling reservation land. The
legislation’s long-term results were mixed, but it signaled the beginning of greater autonomy for Indian tribes
across the country. © Bettmann/Corbis.

representative, and they made no linguistic distinctions
among law, rule, charter, and constitution. In another
case, the nation’s largest tribe, the Navajos, rejected the
BIA’s new policy, largely because the government was
simultaneously reducing Navajo livestock to protect the
Boulder Dam project. In theory, the new policy gave
Indians  a  much  greater  degree  of  self-determination.
In practice, however, although some tribes did benefit,
the BIA and Congress continued to interfere in inter-
nal  Indian  affairs  and  retained  financial  control  over
reservation governments.

Struggles in the West  By the 1920s, agriculture in
California  had  become  a  big  business — intensive,
diversified, and export-oriented. Large-scale corporate-
owned farms produced specialty crops — lettuce, toma-
toes,  peaches,  grapes,  and  cotton — whose  staggered
harvests  allowed  the  use  of  transient  laborers.  Thou-
sands  of  workers,  immigrants  from  Mexico  and  Asia
and  white  migrants  from  the  midwestern  states,

trooped from farm to farm and from crop to crop dur-
ing the long picking season. Some migrants settled in
the rapidly growing cities along the West Coast, espe-
cially the sprawling metropolis of Los Angeles. Under
both  Hoover  and  FDR,  the  federal  government  pro-
moted  the  “repatriation”  of  Mexican  citizens — their
deportation  to  Mexico.  Between  1929  and  1937,
approximately half a million people of Mexican descent
were deported. But historians estimate that more than
60 percent of these were legal U.S. citizens, making the
government’s actions constitutionally questionable.

Despite  the  deportations,  many  Mexican  Ameri-
cans benefitted from the New Deal and generally held
Roosevelt  and  the  Democratic  Party  in  high  regard.
People  of  Mexican  descent,  like  other  Americans,
took jobs with the WPA and the CCC, or received relief
in  the  worst  years  of  the  depression.  The  National
Youth Administration (NYA), which employed young
people  from  families  on  relief  and  sponsored  a  vari-
ety  of  school  programs,  was  especially  important  in

