758

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Mexican American Farm Workers

Among the most hard-pressed workers during the Great Depression were those who labored in the nation’s
agricultural ﬁeld, orchards, and processing plants. Agriculture was a big-time corporate business by the 1930s,
and in California and other parts of the Southwest it employed hundreds of thousands of poor Mexican Amer-
icans and Mexican immigrants. Seizing on the spirit of social protest sweeping the country in the early 1930s,
many of these workers went on strike for better wages and working conditions. Here, women from Mexican
American communities are heading to the cotton ﬁelds near Corcoran, California, to urge workers to join a
major strike of cotton pickers. Though the workers in Corcoran won some wage improvements in this 1933
strike, the ﬁerce battle between employers and workers in American agriculture was far from over and con-
tinues to this day. Library of Congress.

southwestern cities. In California, the Mexican Ameri-
can Movement (MAM), a youth-focused organization,
received  assistance  from  liberal  New  Dealers.  New
Deal  programs  did  not  fundamentally  improve  the
migrant  farm  labor  system  under  which  so  many
people  of  Mexican  descent  labored,  but  Mexicans
joined the New Deal coalition in large numbers because
of the Democrats’ commitment to ordinary Americans.
“Franklin  D.  Roosevelt’s  name  was  the  spark  that
started thousands of Spanish-speaking persons to the
polls,” noted one Los Angeles activist.

Men and women of Asian descent — mostly from
China,  Japan,  and  the  Philippines — formed  a  small
minority of the American population but were a signif-
icant presence in some western cities. Immigrants from
Japan  and  China  had  long  faced  discrimination.  A
1913  California  law  prohibited  them  from  owning
land.  Japanese  farmers,  who  specialized  in  fruit  and
vegetable crops, circumvented this restriction by put-
ting  land  titles  in  the  names  of  their  American-born
children. As the depression cut farm prices and racial

discrimination  excluded  young  Japanese  Americans
from  nonfarm  jobs,  about  20  percent  of  the  immi-
grants returned to Japan.

Chinese Americans were less prosperous than their
Japanese  counterparts.  Only  3  percent  of  Chinese
Americans worked in professional and technical posi-
tions,  and  discrimination  barred  them  from  most
industrial  jobs.  In  San  Francisco,  the  majority  of
Chinese worked in small businesses: restaurants, laun-
dries,  and  firms  that  imported  textiles  and  ceramics.
During  the  depression,  they  turned  for  assistance  to
Chinese social organizations such as huiguan (district
associations)  and  to  the  city  government;  in  1931,
about one-sixth of San Francisco’s Chinese population
was  receiving  public  aid.  But  few  Chinese  benefitted
from the New Deal. Until the repeal of the Exclusion
Act  in  1943,  Chinese  immigrants  were  classified  as
“aliens  ineligible  for  citizenship”  and  therefore  were
excluded from most federal programs.

Because Filipino immigrants came from a U.S. ter-
ritory,  they  were  not  affected  by  the  ban  on  Asian

