CHAPTER 23

  Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939

759

immigration enacted in 1924. During the 1920s, their
numbers  swelled  to  about  50,000,  many  of  whom
worked  as  laborers  on  large  corporate-owned  farms.
As  the  depression  cut  wages,  Filipino  immigration
slowed to a trickle, and it was virtually cut off by the
Tydings-McDuffie Act of 1934. The act granted inde-
pendence  to  the  Philippines  (which  since  1898  had
been an American colony), classified all Filipinos in the
United  States  as  aliens,  and  restricted  immigration
from the Philippines to fifty people per year.

Reshaping the Environment
Attention to natural resources was a dominant theme
of the New Deal, and the shaping of the landscape was
among its most visible legacies. Franklin Roosevelt and
Interior Secretary Harold Ickes saw themselves as con-
servationists in the tradition of FDR’s cousin, Theodore
Roosevelt.  In  an  era  before  environmentalism,  FDR
practiced what he called the “gospel of conservation.”
The  president  cared  primarily  about  making  the
land — and other natural resources, such as trees and
water — better  serve  human  needs.  National  policy
stressed  scientific  land  management  and  ecological
balance. Preserving wildlife and wilderness was of sec-
ondary importance. Under Roosevelt, the federal gov-
ernment both responded to environmental crises and

reshaped the use of natural resources, especially water,
in the United States.

The Dust Bowl  Among the most hard-pressed citi-
zens  during  the  depression  were  farmers  fleeing  the
“dust  bowl”  of  the  Great  Plains.  Between  1930  and
1941, a severe drought afflicted the semiarid states of
Oklahoma,  Texas,  New  Mexico,  Colorado,  Arkansas,
and  Kansas.  Farmers  in  these  areas  had  stripped  the
land of its native vegetation, which destroyed the deli-
cate ecology of the plains. To grow
wheat  and  other  crops,  they  had
pushed  agriculture  beyond  the
natural limits of the soil, making
their land vulnerable, in times of
drought,  to  wind  erosion  of  the
topsoil  (Map  23.4).  When  the
winds came, huge clouds of thick
dust  rolled  over  the  land,  turning  the  day  into  night.
This  ecological  disaster  prompted  a  mass  exodus.  At
least  350,000  “Okies”  (so  called  whether  or  not  they
were from Oklahoma) loaded their belongings into cars
and trucks and headed to California. John Steinbeck’s
novel The Grapes of Wrath (1939) immortalized them,
and New Deal photographer Dorothea Lange’s haunt-
ing images of Cali fornia migrant camps made them the
public face of the depression’s human toll.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Why did the natural envi-
ronment receive so much
attention under New Deal
programs, and with what
result?

MAP 23.4
The Dust Bowl and Federal Building
Projects in the West, 1930–1941

A U.S. Weather Bureau scientist called
the drought of the 1930s “the worst in
the climatological history of the country.”
Conditions were especially severe in
the southern plains, where farming on
marginal land threatened the environment
even before the drought struck. As farm
families migrated west on U.S. Route 66,
the federal government began a series of
massive building projects that provided
ﬂood control, irrigation, electric power,
and transportation facilities to residents
of the states of the Far West.

C A N A D A

(cid:41)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)
(cid:51)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:78)

(cid:42)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:72)
(cid:39)(cid:68)(cid:80)

N

(cid:37)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:68)(cid:80)

E

Columbia R.

W

S

(cid:54)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:68)(cid:80)

(cid:42)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:42)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)
(cid:37)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:72)

(cid:54)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:41)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:16)
(cid:50)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:37)(cid:68)(cid:92)
(cid:37)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:72)

(cid:43)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:68)(cid:80)

ColoradoR.

(cid:53)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:25)(cid:25)

PA CIFI C
OCEAN

(cid:53)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:25)(cid:25)

Area of dust bowl
Area of severe wind erosion
Area of dust storm, May 1933
Margin of semiarid west (20" annual rainfall)
Each dot represents 5,000 acres in
marginal cropland 1924–1929
Major migration route

Gulf of Mexico

M E X I C O

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

