760

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

U.S. Department of Agriculture, lent their expertise to
establishing sound farming practices in the plains.

Tennessee  Valley  Authority  The  most  extensive
New  Deal  environmental  undertaking  was  the  Ten-
nessee  Valley  Authority (TVA), which Roosevelt saw
as the first step in modernizing the South. Funded by
Congress  in  1933,  the  TVA  integrated  flood  control,
reforestation,  electricity  generation,  and  agricultural
and industrial development. The dams and their hydro-
electric plants provided cheap electric power for homes
and factories as well as ample recreational opportuni-
ties for the valley’s residents. The massive project won
praise around the world (Map 23.5).

The  TVA  was  an  integral  part  of  the  Roosevelt
administration’s  effort  to  keep  farmers  on  the  land
by enhancing the quality of rural life. The Rural  Elec-
triﬁcation Administration (REA), established in 1935,
was also central to that goal. Fewer than one-tenth of
the nation’s 6.8 million farms had electricity. The REA
addressed this problem by promoting nonprofit farm
cooperatives  that  offered  loans  to  farmers  to  install
power lines. By 1940, 40 percent of the nation’s farms
had electricity; a decade later, 90 percent did. Electricity
brought relief from the drudgery and isolation of farm
life.  Electric  irons,  vacuum  cleaners,  and  washing
machines  eased  women’s  burdens,  and  radios bright-
ened  the  lives  of  the  entire  family.  Along  with  the
automobile and the movies, electricity broke down the
barriers between urban and rural life.

Grand  Coulee  As  the  nation’s  least  populated  but
fastest-growing  region,  the  West  benefitted  enor-
mously from the New Deal’s attention to the environ-
ment.  With  the  largest  number  of  state  and  federal
parks in the country, the West gained countless trails,
bridges, cabins, and other recreational facilities, laying
the groundwork for the post–World War II expansion
of  western  tourism.  On  the  Colorado  River,  Boulder
Dam (later renamed Hoover Dam) was completed in
1935  with  Public  Works  Administration  funds;  the
dam  generated  power  for  the  region’s  growing  cities
such as Las Vegas, Los Angeles, and Phoenix.

The largest project in the West, however, took shape
in  an  obscure  corner  of  Washington  State,  where  the
PWA and the Bureau of Reclamation built the Grand
Coulee  Dam  on  the  Columbia  River.  When  it  was
completed  in  1941,  Grand  Coulee  was  the  largest
electricity-producing  structure  in  the  world,  and  its
150-mile lake provided irrigation for the state’s major
crops:  apples,  cherries,  pears,  potatoes,  and  wheat.
Inspired by the dam and the modernizing spirit of the

The Human Face of the Great Depression

Migrant Mother by Dorothea Lange is one of the most
famous documentary photographs of the 1930s. On assign-
ment for the Resettlement Administration, Lange spent only
ten minutes in a pea-pickers’ camp in Nipomo, California.
There she captured this image (though not the name) of the
woman whose despair and resignation she so powerfully
recorded. In the 1970s the woman was identiﬁed as Florence
Thompson, a native Cherokee from Oklahoma, who disagreed
with Lange’s recollections of the circumstances of the taking
of the photograph. Thompson and her family had left Nipomo,
however, by the time the publication of this image sparked a
large relief effort directed at the camp’s migrant workers.
Library of Congress.

Roosevelt and Ickes believed that poor land prac-
tices  made  for  poor  people.  Under  their  direction,
government  agencies  tackled  the  dust  bowl’s  human
causes. Agents from the newly created Soil Conserva-
tion  Service,  for  instance,  taught  farmers  to  prevent
soil  erosion  by  tilling  hillsides  along  the  contours  of
the land. They also encouraged (and sometimes paid)
farmers to take certain commercial crops out of pro-
duction and plant soil-preserving grasses instead. One
of the U.S. Forest Service’s most widely publicized pro-
grams was the Shelterbelts, the planting of 220 million
trees  running  north  along  the  99th  meridian  from
Abilene,  Texas,  to  the  Canadian  border.  Planted  as  a
windbreak,  the  trees  also  prevented  soil  erosion.  A
variety of government agencies, from the CCC to the

