CHAPTER 23

  Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939

761

MAP 23.5
The Tennessee Valley Authority,
1933–1952

The Tennessee Valley Authority was one
of the New Deal’s most far-reaching
environmental projects. Between 1933
and 1952, the TVA built twenty dams
and improved ﬁve others, taming the
ﬂood-prone Tennessee River and its
main tributaries. The cheap hydro-
electric power generated by the
dams brought electricity to industries
as well as hundreds of thousands of
area resi dents, and artiﬁcial lakes
provided extensive recreational
facilities. Widely praised at the time,
the TVA came under attack in the
1970s for its practice of strip mining
and the pollution caused by its power
plants and chemical factories.

ILLINOIS

KENTUCKY

WEST
VIRGINIA

MISSOURI

Cairo

(cid:3)

(cid:3)
Paducah

ARKANSAS

R.
i
p
p
i
s
s

Missi

Memphis

(cid:3)

Florence

Muscle Shoals

Tupelo

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:2)
Decatur

(cid:3)

MISSISSIPPI

(cid:3)

Huntsville

R.

Tennessee

Bowling Green

(cid:3)

CumberlandR.

Nashville

(cid:3)

Oak Ridge

(cid:3)

TENNESSEE

DuckR.
(cid:2)

Watt’s Bar

VIRGINIA

ClinchR.
HolstonR.

Bristol

(cid:3)

.
S
T
M

(cid:3)

Knoxville

(cid:3)
Asheville

E

G

D
NORTH
I
R
CAROLINA

(cid:3)
Chattanooga

E

U

L

B

ALABAMA

Birmingham

(cid:3)

N

W

E

S
100 miles

50

50

100 kilometers

0

0

GEORGIA

Atlanta

(cid:3)

SOUTH
CAROLINA

Area served by TVA electric power
Tennessee River Valley watershed
Principal TVA dam
Steam power plant
Chemical plant

(cid:2)

New  Deal,  folk  singer  Woody  Guthrie  wrote  a  song
about the Columbia. “Your power is turning our dark-
ness to dawn,” he sang, “so roll on, Columbia, roll on!”
New  Deal  projects  that  enhanced  people’s  enjoy-
ment  of  the  natural  environment  can  be  seen  today
throughout the country. CCC and WPA workers built
the  famous  Blue  Ridge  Parkway,  which  connects  the
Shenandoah National Park in Virginia with the Great
Smoky Mountains National Park in North Carolina. In
the West, government workers built the San Francisco
Zoo,  Berkeley’s  Tilden  Park,  and  the  canals  of  San
Antonio.  The  Civilian  Conservation  Corps  helped  to
complete  the  East  Coast’s  Appalachian  Trail  and  the
West  Coast’s  Pacific  Crest  Trail  through  the  Sierra
Nevada. In state parks across the country, cabins, shel-
ters, picnic areas, lodges, and observation towers stand
as  monuments  to  the  New  Deal  ethos  of  recreation
coexisting with nature.

leading  painters,  muralists,  and  sculptors.  Jackson
Pollock,  Alice  Neel,  Willem  de  Kooning,  and  Louise
Nevelson  all  received  support.  The  Federal  Music
Project and Federal Writers’ Project (FWP) employed
15,000 musicians and 5,000 writers, respectively. Among
the  latter  were  Saul  Bellow,  Ralph  Ellison,  and  John
Cheever,  who  became  great  American  writers.  The
FWP also collected oral histories, including two thou-
sand  narratives  by  former  slaves.  The  black  folklorist
and novelist Zora Neale Hurston finished three novels
while in the Florida FWP, among them Their Eyes Were
Watching  God  (1937).  Richard  Wright  won  the  1938
Story magazine prize for the best tale by a WPA writer
and went on to complete Native Son (1940), a searing
novel about white racism. Similarly, the Federal Theatre
Project (FTP) nurtured such talented directors, actors,
and  playwrights  as  Orson  Welles,  John  Huston,  and
Arthur Miller.

The New Deal and the Arts
In response to the Great Depression, many American
writers and artists redefined their relationship to soci-
ety.  Never  had  there  been  a  decade,  critic  Malcolm
Cowley  suggested  in  1939,  “when  literary  events  fol-
lowed so closely on the flying coat-tails of social events.”
New Deal administrators encouraged artists to create
projects that would be of interest to the entire commu-
nity,  not  just  the  cultured  elite.  Encouraged  by  the
popular New Deal slogan “Art for the millions,” artists
painted  murals  in  hundreds  of  public  buildings.  The
WPA’s  Federal  Art  Project  gave  work  to  many  young
artists  who  would  become  the  twentieth  century’s

The Legacies of the New Deal
The  New  Deal  addressed  the  Great  Depression  by
restoring hope and promising security. FDR and Con-
gress created a powerful social-welfare state that took
unprecedented  responsibility  for  the  well-being  of
Amer ican  citizens.  During  the  1930s,  millions  of
people began to pay taxes directly to the Social Security
Administration, and more than one-third of the popu-
lation  received  direct  government  assistance  from
federal  programs,  including  old-age  pensions,  unem-
ployment compensation, farm loans, relief work, and
mortgage  guarantees.  New  legislation  regulated  the
stock  market,  reformed  the  Federal  Reserve  System,

