762

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Grand Coulee Dam

This extraordinary photo from a Life maga-
zine essay shows workers hitching a ride on
a 13-ton conduit as it is lowered into place on
the Grand Coulee Dam in Washington State.
Dozens of dams were constructed across the
country under the auspices of various New
Deal programs, but none were more majestic
than two in the West: Boulder Dam (renamed
Hoover Dam in 1947) and Grand Coulee. Built
to harness the awesome power of the Colum-
bia River as it rushed to the Paciﬁc, Grand
Coulee would ultimately provide electric power
to Seattle, Portland, and other West Coast cities
and new irrigation waters for Washington’s
apple and cherry orchards, among many other
crops. Library of Congress.

and subjected business corporations to federal regula-
tion.  The  New  Deal’s  pattern  of  government  involve-
ment  in  social  life  would  persist  for  the  rest  of  the
twentieth century. In the 1960s, Lyndon Johnson and
the  “Great  Society”  Congress  dramatically  expanded
social-welfare programs, most of which remained intact
in the wake of the “Reagan Revolution” of the 1980s.

Like  all  other  major  social  transformations,  the
New Deal was criticized both by those who thought it
did  too  much  and  by  those  who  believed  it  did  too
little.  Conservatives,  who  prioritized  limited  govern-
ment  and  individual  freedom,  pointed  out  that  the
New Deal state intruded deeply into the personal and
financial  lives  of  citizens  and  the
affairs  of  business.  Conversely,
advocates  of  social-welfare  liber-
alism  complained  that  the  New
Deal’s  safety  net  had  too  many
holes: no national health-care sys-
tem, welfare programs that excluded domestic workers
and  farm  laborers,  and  state  governments  that  often

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What was the New Deal’s
long-term legacy?

limited  the  benefits  distributed  under  New  Deal
programs.

Whatever  the  merits  of  its  critics,  the  New  Deal
unquestionably  transformed  the  American  political
landscape. From 1896 to 1932, the Republican Party had
commanded the votes of a majority of Americans. That
changed as Franklin Roosevelt’s magnetic personality
and  innovative  programs  brought  millions  of  voters
into the Democratic fold. Demo cratic recruits included
first- and second-generation immigrants from southern
and central Europe — Italians, Poles, Slovaks, and Jews —
as well as African American migrants to northern cities.
Organized  labor  aligned  itself  with  a  Demo cratic
administration that had recognized unions as a legiti-
mate  force  in  modern  industrial  life. The  elderly  and
the unemployed, assisted by the Social Security Act, like-
wise supported FDR. This New Deal coalition of ethnic
groups, city dwellers, organized labor, African Ameri-
cans, and a cross section of the middle class formed the
nucleus  of  the  northern  Democratic  Party  and  sup-
ported additional liberal reforms in the decades to come.

