CHAPTER 23

  CHAPTER REVIEW

763

SUMMARY
We  have  seen  how  Franklin  Delano  Roosevelt’s  First
New  Deal  focused  on  stimulating  recovery,  providing
relief to the unemployed, and regulating banks and other
financial institutions. The Second New Deal was different.
Influenced by the persistence of the depression and the
growing  popularity  of  Huey  Long’s  Share  Our  Wealth
proposals, Roosevelt promoted social-welfare legislation
that provided Americans with economic security.

We  also  explored  the  impact  of  the  New  Deal  on
various groups of citizens, especially African Ameri cans,
women, and unionized workers. Our survey paid par-
ticular  attention  to  the  lives  of  the  Mexicans,  Asians,
and  Okies  who  worked  in  the  farms  and  factories  of
California. Because of New Deal assistance, the mem-

bers of those groups gravitated toward the Democratic
Party. The party’s coalition of ethnic workers, African
Americans,  farmers,  parts  of  the  middle  classes,  and
white  southerners  gave  FDR  and  other  Democrats  a
landslide victory in 1936.

Finally,  we  examined  the  accomplishments  of  the
New Deal. In 1933, New Deal programs resolved the
banking crisis while preserving capitalist institutions.
Subsequently,  these  programs  expanded  the  federal
government and, through the Social Security system,
farm  subsidy  programs,  and  public  works  projects,
launched federal policies that were important to nearly
every  American.  Great  dams  and  electricity  projects
sponsored  by  the  Tennessee  Valley  Authority,  the
Works  Progress  Administration  in  the  West,  and  the
Rural  Electrification  Administration  permanently
improved the quality of life for the nation’s citizens.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the signiﬁcance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

Key People

Smoot-Hawley Tariff (p. 736)
Bonus Army (p. 738)
fireside chats (p. 740)
Hundred Days (p. 740)
Glass-Steagall Act (p. 740)
Agricultural Adjustment Act

(p. 741)

National Recovery Administra-

tion (p. 741)

welfare state (p. 747)
Wagner Act (p. 747)
Social Security Act (p. 747)
classical liberalism (p. 749)
Works Progress Administration

(p. 749)

Roosevelt recession (p. 751)
Keynesian economics (p. 751)
Indian Reorganization Act

Herbert Hoover (p. 736)
Franklin Delano Roosevelt

(p. 739)

Father Charles Coughlin (p. 747)
Huey Long (p. 747)
Frances Perkins (p. 754)
Eleanor Roosevelt (p. 754)
Mary McLeod Bethune (p. 755)
John Collier (p. 756)

Public Works Administration

(p. 756)

(p. 741)

Civilian Conservation Corps

(p. 741)

dust bowl (p. 759)
Tennessee Valley Authority

(p. 760)

Federal Housing Administration

Rural Electrification Administra-

tion (p. 760)

(p. 744)

Securities and Exchange
Commission (p. 745)
Liberty League (p. 746)
National Association of
Manufacturers (p. 746)

Townsend Plan (p. 747)

