764

PART 7

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  Some historians have seen the New Deal as a natu-
ral evolution of progressive reforms from earlier in
the century. Others have argued that it represented
a revolution in social values and government insti-
tutions. Do you view the New Deal as an extension
of progressivism, or a radical break with the past?
Provide evidence for your argument.

2.  How  did  the  lives  of  women,  workers,  and  racial
and  ethnic  minority  groups  change  during  the
Great  Depression?  What  role  did  the  New  Deal
play in helping those groups of Americans?

3.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events listed under “Politics and Power,” “Identity,”
and  “Ideas,  Beliefs,  and  Culture”  on  the  thematic
timeline  on  page  671.  In  what  ways  did  the  New
Deal  coalition  and  the  emergence  of  the  welfare
state  change  the  character  of  Ameri can  politics?
Why did Republicans oppose the Democratic ini-
tiatives,  and  how  did  these  public  debates  shape
visions of American national identity?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  People  often
view the New Deal as a set of government programs
and  policies  enacted  by  President  Roosevelt  and
Congress.  In  this  version,  change  comes  from
above.  Yet  there  is  also  evidence  that  ordinary
Americans  played  an  important  role  in  inspiring
and  championing  aspects  of  the  New  Deal.  Find
several  specific  examples  of  this,  and  think  about
the  possible  connections  between  the  struggles,
protests,  and  actions  of  ordinary  people  and  the
programs of the New Deal.

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  Consider two images: the
famous  Dorothea  Lange  photograph  of  Florence
Thompson  on  page  760  and  the  photograph  of
workers building the Grand Coulee Dam on page
762. Why is the first image more frequently associ-
ated  with  the  Great  Depression  than  the  second?
How would it change our understanding of the era
if we made the second photograph the iconic repre-
sentation of the depression?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Kristen Downey, The Woman Behind the New Deal:
The Life of Frances Perkins, FDR’s Secretary of Labor
and His Moral Conscience (2009). Discusses women
and the New Deal years as seen through the life and
career of an important reformer.

Ira Katznelson, Fear Itself: The New Deal and the
Origins of Our Times (2013). A powerful explanation
of the New Deal’s racial politics.

Robert S. McElvaine, The Great Depression (1984) and
Down & Out in the Great Depression (1983). The first
is an excellent overview of the depression and the
New Deal; the second contains letters written by
ordinary people.

James F. Simon, FDR and Chief Justice Hughes: The
President, the Supreme Court, and the Epic Battle over
the New Deal (2012). Shows the legal controversies
surrounding FDR’s expansion of the state.

John Steinbeck, The Grapes of Wrath (1939); Josephine
Herbst, Pity Is Not Enough (1933); and Richard
Wright, Native Son (1940). Classic depression-era
novels.

For extensive collections of 1930s materials, see the
“New Deal Network” at newdeal.feri.org;
government-commissioned art at archives.gov
/exhibits/new_deal_for_the_arts; and the slave
narratives collected by the Federal Writers’ Project
at memory.loc.gov/ammem/snhtml.

