24

C H A P T E R

THE ROAD TO WAR

The Rise of Fascism

War Approaches

The Attack on Pearl Harbor

ORGANIZING FOR
VICTORY

Financing the War

Mobilizing the American

Fighting Force

Workers and the War Effort

Politics in Wartime

LIFE ON THE HOME
FRONT

“For the Duration”

Migration and the Wartime City

Japanese Removal

FIGHTING AND WINNING
THE WAR

Wartime Aims and Tensions

The War in Europe

The War in the Pacific

The Atomic Bomb and the End

of the War

The Toll of the War

766

The World at War
1937–1945

The  Second  World  War  was  the

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
How  did  World  War  II  transform
the  United  States  domestically  and
change  its  relationship  with  the
world?

deﬁning international event of the
twentieth  century.  Battles  raged
across six of the world’s seven continents
and  all  of  its  oceans.  It  killed  more  than
50 million people and wounded hundreds
of millions more. When it was over, the industrial economies and much of the infra-
structure of Europe and East Asia lay in ruins. Waged with both technologically advanced
weapons and massive armies, the war involved every industrialized power in Europe,
North America, and Asia, as well as dozens of other nations, many of them colonies of
the industrialized countries.

The military conﬂict began on two continents: in Asia with Japan’s 1937 invasion of
China across the Sea of Japan, and in Europe with the 1939 blitzkrieg (lightning war)
conducted by Germany in Poland. It ended in 1945 after American planes dropped two
atomic bombs, the product of stunning yet ominous scientiﬁc breakthroughs, on the
Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. In between these demonstrations of techno-
logical  prowess  and  devastating  power,  huge  armies  confronted  and  destroyed  one
another in the ﬁelds of France, the forests and steppes of Russia, the river valleys of
China, the volcanic islands of the Paciﬁc, and the deserts of North Africa.

“Armed defense of democratic existence is now being gallantly waged in four con-
tinents,”  President  Franklin  Delano  Roosevelt  told  the  nation  in  January  1941.  After
remaining  neutral  for  several  years,  the  United  States  would  commit  to  that  “armed
defense.” Both FDR and British prime minister Winston Churchill came to see the war
as a defense of democratic values from the threat posed by German, Italian, and Japa-
nese fascism. For them, the brutal conﬂict was the “good war.” When the grim reality
of the Jewish Holocaust came to light, U.S. participation in the war seemed even more
just. But as much as it represented a struggle between democracy and fascism, it was
also  inescapably  a  war  to  maintain  British,  French,  and  Dutch  control  of  colonies  in
Africa, India, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. By 1945, democracy in the industrial-
ized world had been preserved, and a new Euro-American alliance had taken hold; the
future of the vast European colonial empires, however, remained unresolved.

On  the  U.S.  domestic  front,  World  War  II  ended  the  Great  Depression,  hastened
profound social changes, and expanded the scope and authority of the federal govern-
ment. Racial politics and gender roles shifted under the weight of wartime migration
and  labor  shortages.  The  pace  of  urbanization  increased  as  millions  of  Americans
uprooted themselves and moved hundreds or thousands of miles to join the military or
to take a war job. A stronger, more robust federal government, the product of a long,
hard-fought war, would remain in place to ﬁght an even longer, more expensive, and
potentially more dangerous Cold War in the ensuing years. These developments, which
accelerated transformations already under way, would have repercussions far into the
postwar decades.

