768

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

The Road to War
The Great Depression disrupted economic life around
the world and brought the collapse of traditional polit-
ical institutions. In response, an antidemocratic move-
ment known as fascism, which had originated in Italy
during  the  1920s,  developed  in  Germany,  Spain,  and
Japan. By the mid-1930s, these nations had instituted
authoritarian, militaristic governments led by power-
ful dictators: Benito Mussolini in Italy, Adolf Hitler in
Nazi  Germany,  Francisco  Franco  in  Spain,  and,  after
1940, Hideki Tojo in Japan. As early as 1936, President
Roosevelt  warned  that  other  peoples  had  “sold  their
heritage of freedom” and urged Americans to work for
“the survival of democracy” both at home and abroad.
Constrained by strong isolationist sentiment, by 1940
FDR  was  cautiously  leading  the  nation  toward  war
against the fascist powers.

The Rise of Fascism
World War II had its roots in the settlement of World
War I. Germany struggled under the harsh terms of the
Treaty of Versailles, and Japan and Italy had their desire
for  overseas  empires  thwarted  by  the  treaty  makers.
Faced with the expansive ambitions and deep resent-
ments of those countries, the League of Nations, the col-
lective security system established at Versailles, proved
unable to maintain the existing international order.

Fascism, as instituted in Germany by Hitler, com-
bined  a  centralized,  authoritarian  state,  a  doctrine  of
Aryan  racial  supremacy,  and  intense  nationalism  in
a  call  for  the  spiritual  reawakening  of  the  German
people.  Fascist  leaders  worldwide  disparaged  parlia-
mentary government, independent labor movements,
and  individual  rights.  They  opposed  both  the  eco-
nomic  collectivism  of  the  Soviet  Union — where,  in
theory, the state managed the economy to ensure social
equality — and the competitive capitalist economies of
the United States and Western Europe. Fascist move-
ments arose around the world in the 1930s but man-
aged to achieve power in only a handful of countries.
Those countries were at the center of global war mak-
ing in the 1930s.

Japan  and  Italy  The  first  challenge  came  from
Japan. To become an industrial power, Japan required
raw  materials  and  overseas  mar-
kets.  Like  the  Western  European
powers  and  the  United  States
before  it,  Japan  embraced  an
expansionary  foreign  policy  in

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What motivated Japanese,
Italian, and German expan-
sionism?

pursuit of colonial possessions and overseas influence.
In 1931, its troops occupied Manchuria, an industrial-
ized  province  in  northern  China,  and  in  1937  the
Japanese  launched  a  full-scale  invasion  of  China.  In
both  instances,  the  League  of  Nations  condemned
Japan’s actions but did nothing to stop them.

Japan’s defiance of the League encouraged a fascist
leader half a world away: Italy’s Benito Mussolini, who
had come to power in 1922. Il Duce (The Leader), as
Mussolini  was  known,  had  long  denounced  the  Ver-
sailles  treaty,  which  denied  Italy’s  colonial  claims  in
Africa  and  the  Middle  East  after  World  War  I.  As  in
Japan, the Italian fascists desired overseas colonies for
raw materials, markets, and national prestige. In 1935,
Mussolini invaded Ethiopia, one of the few remaining
independent  countries  in  Africa.  Ethiopian  emperor
Haile Selassie appealed to the League of Nations, but
the  League’s  verbal  condemnation  and  limited  sanc-
tions, its only real leverage, did not stop Italy from tak-
ing control of Ethiopia in 1936.

Hitler’s  Germany  Germany,  however,  posed  the
gravest threat to the existing world order. Huge World
War I reparation payments, economic depression, fear
of communism, labor unrest, and rising unemployment
fueled  the  ascent  of  Adolf  Hitler  and  his  National
Socialist (Nazi) Party. When Hitler became chancellor
of Germany in 1933, the Reichstag (the German legis-
lature) granted him dictatorial powers to deal with the
economic crisis. Hitler promptly outlawed other polit-
ical  parties,  arrested  many  of  his  political  rivals,  and
declared himself führer (leader). Under Nazi control,
the Reichstag invested all legislative power in Hitler’s
hands.

Hitler’s goal was nothing short of European domi-
nation and world power, as he had made clear in his
1925 book Mein Kampf (My Struggle). The book out-
lined his plans to overturn the territorial settlements of
the Versailles treaty, unite Germans living throughout
central Europe in a great German fatherland, and annex
large areas of Eastern Europe. The “inferior races” who
lived in these regions — Jews, Gypsies, and Slavs — would
be removed or subordinated to the German “master race.”
These  territories  would  provide  Germany  with  what
Hitler  called  “lebensraum” — a  new  region  of  settle-
ment and farming and a source of natural resources. A
virulent  anti-Semite,  Hitler  had  long  blamed  Jews  for
Germany’s problems. Once in power, he began a sus-
tained and brutal persecution of Jews, which expanded
into a campaign of extermination in the early 1940s.

In 1935, Hitler began to rearm Germany, in viola-
tion  of  the  Versailles  treaty.  No  one  stopped  him.  In

