CHAPTER 24

  The World at War, 1937–1945

769

Adolf Hitler

Adolf Hitler salutes German
troops during a parade at the
Nazi Party’s annual congress at
Nuremberg. German fascism
reveled in great public spectacles,
such as the famous Nuremberg
rallies held every year between
the early 1920s and the late
1930s. Hitler used these mass
rallies, at which tens and some-
times hundreds of thousands of
soldiers and civilians gathered,
to build wide support for his
policies of aggressive militarism
abroad and suppression of Jews
and other minorities at home.
Getty Images.

1936,  he  sent  troops  into  the  Rhineland,  a  demilita-
rized zone under the terms of Versailles. Again, France
and Britain took no action. Later that year, Hitler and
Mussolini formed the Rome-Berlin Axis, a political and
military alliance between the two fascist nations. Also
in 1936, Germany signed a pact to create a military alli-
ance with Japan against the Soviet Union. With these
alliances  in place,  and  with  France  and  Great  Britain
reluctant to oppose him, Hitler had seized the military
advantage in Europe by 1937.

War Approaches
As Hitler pushed his initiatives in Europe, which was
mired in economic depression as deeply as the United
States, the Roosevelt administration faced widespread
isolationist  sentiment  at  home.  In  part,  this  desire  to
avoid  European  entanglements  reflected  disillusion
with American participation in World War I. In 1934,
Gerald P. Nye, a progressive Republican senator from
North Dakota, launched an investigation into the prof-
its of munitions makers during that war. Nye’s commit-
tee alleged that arms manufacturers (popularly labeled
“merchants  of  death”)  had  maneuvered  President
Wilson into World War I.

Although Nye’s committee failed to prove its charge
against weapon makers, its factual findings prompted
an isolationist-minded Congress to pass a series of acts
to prevent the nation from being drawn into another
overseas war. The  Neutrality  Act  of  1935 imposed an
embargo  on  selling  arms  to  warring  countries  and
declared that Americans traveling on the ships of bel-
ligerent  nations  did  so  at  their  own  risk.  In  1936,
Congress banned loans to belligerents, and in 1937 it
imposed a “cash-and-carry” requirement: if a warring
country  wanted  to  purchase  nonmilitary  goods  from
the United States, it had to pay cash and carry them in
its own ships, keeping the United States out of poten-
tially dangerous naval warfare.

Americans for the most part had little enthusiasm
for war, and a wide variety of groups and individuals
espoused  isolationism.  Many  isolationists  looked  to
Republican Ohio senator Robert Taft, who distrusted
both Roosevelt and European nations with equal con-
viction, or to the aviator hero Charles A. Lindbergh,
who  delivered  impassioned  speeches  against  inter-
vention  in  Europe.  Some  isolationists,  such  as  the
conservative  National  Legion  of  Mothers  of  Amer-
ica,  combined  anticommunism,  Christian  morality,
and  even  anti-Semitism.  Isolationists  were  primarily

