770

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

as  the  United  States,  France,  and  Britain  remained
neutral.

In the United States, the Popular Front drew from a
wide range of social groups. The American Communist
Party, which had increased its membership to 100,000
as  the  depression  revealed  flaws  in  the  capitalist  sys-
tem, led the way. African American civil rights activ-
ists, trade unionists, left-wing writers and intellectuals,
and  even  a  few  New  Deal  administrators  also  joined
the coalition. In time, however, many supporters in the
United  States  grew  uneasy  with  the  Popular  Front
because of the rigidity of Communists and the brutal
political repression in the Soviet Union under Joseph
Stalin. Nevertheless, Popular Front activists were among
a  small  but  vocal  group  of  Americans  encouraging
Roosevelt  to  take  a  stronger  stand  against  European
fascism.

The  Failure  of  Appeasement  Encouraged  by  the
weak  worldwide  response  to  the  invasions  of  China,
Ethiopia,  and  the  Rhineland,  and  emboldened  by
British and French neutrality during the Spanish Civil
War,  Hitler  grew  more  aggressive  in  1938.  He  sent
troops to annex German-speaking Austria while mak-
ing clear his intention to seize part of Czechoslovakia.
Because  Czechoslovakia  had  an  alliance  with  France,
war seemed imminent. But at the Munich Conference
in  September  1938,  Britain  and  France  capitulated,
agreeing  to  let  Germany  annex  the  Sudetenland — a
German-speaking border area of Czechoslovakia — in
return for Hitler’s pledge to seek no more territory. The
agreement,  declared  British  prime  minister  Neville
Chamberlain, guaranteed “peace for our time.” Hitler
drew a different conclusion, telling his generals: “Our
enemies are small fry. I saw them in Munich.”

Within  six  months,  Hitler’s  forces  had  overrun
the  rest  of  Czechoslovakia  and  were  threatening
to  march  into  Poland.  Realizing  that  their  policy  of
appeasement — capitulating to Hitler’s demands — had
been disastrous, Britain and France warned Hitler that
further  aggression  meant  war.  Then,  in  August  1939,
Hitler and Stalin shocked the world by signing a mutual
nonaggression pact. For Hitler, this pact was crucial, as
it meant that Germany would not have to wage a two-
front war against Britain and France in the west and the
Soviet Union in the east. On September 1, 1939, Hitler
launched  a  blitzkrieg  against  Poland.  Two  days  later,
Britain  and  France  declared  war  on  Germany.  World
War II had officially begun.

Two days after the European war started, the United
States  declared  its  neutrality.  But  President  Roosevelt
made no secret of his sympathies. When war broke out

Charles Lindbergh Cartoon

Charles Lindbergh, the ﬁrst person to ﬂy solo nonstop across
the Atlantic Ocean, was an American hero in the 1930s. In
1941, he had become the public face of the America First
Committee, which was determined the keep the United
States from entering the wars raging in Europe and Asia.
In this political cartoon from October 1941, Lindbergh is
shown standing on a soapbox labeled “Fascism,” looking
up at the ﬁgure of “Democracy.” The implication is that
Lindbergh had been fooled by German propaganda into
taking its side. Less than two months after the cartoon
appeared, Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, and isolationist
sentiment all but disappeared in the United States. Library
of Congress.

conservatives, but a contingent of progressives (or lib-
erals)  opposed  America’s  involvement  in  the  war  on
pacifist  or  moral  grounds.  Whatever  their  philoso-
phies, ardent isolationists forced Roosevelt to approach
the brewing war cautiously.

The Popular Front  Other Americans responded to
the rise of European fascism by advocating U.S. inter-
vention. Some of the most prominent Americans push-
ing for greater involvement in Europe, even if it meant
war, were affiliated with the  Popular  Front. Fearful of
German  and  Japanese  aggression,  the  Soviet  Union
instructed  Communists  in  Western  Europe  and  the
United States to join with liberals in a broad coalition
opposing fascism. This Popular Front supported vari-
ous  international  causes — backing  the  Loyalists  in
their  fight  against  fascist  leader  Francisco  Franco  in
the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939), for example, even

