in  1914,  Woodrow  Wilson  had  told  Americans  to  be
neutral “in thought as well as in action.” FDR, by con-
trast,  now  said:  “This  nation  will  remain  a  neutral
nation, but I cannot ask that every American remain
neutral in thought as well.” The overwhelming majority
of Americans — some 84 percent, according to a poll in
1939 — supported  Britain  and  France  rather  than
Germany, but most wanted America to avoid another
European war.

At  first,  the  need  for  U.S.  intervention  seemed
remote. After Germany conquered Poland in Septem-
ber 1939, calm settled over Europe. Then, on April 9,
1940,  German  forces  invaded  Denmark  and  Norway.
In  May,  the  Netherlands,  Belgium,  and  Luxembourg
fell to the swift German army. The final shock came in
mid-June, when France too surrendered. Britain now
stood  alone  against  Hitler’s  plans  for  domination  of
Europe.

Isolationism  and  Internationalism  What  Time
magazine  would  later  call  America’s  “thousand-step
road to war” had already begun. After a bitter battle in
Congress in 1939, Roosevelt won a change in the neu-
trality laws to allow the Allies to buy arms as  well as
nonmilitary goods on a cash-and-carry basis. Interven-
tionists, led by journalist William Allen White and his
Committee  to  Defend  America  by  Aiding  the  Allies,
became increasingly vocal in 1940 as war escalated in
Europe. (Interventionists were also known as “interna-
tionalists,” since they believed in engaging with, rather
than withdrawing from, international developments.)
In  response,  isolationists  formed  the  America  First
Committee (AFC), with well-respected figures such as
Lindbergh and Senator Nye urging the nation to stay
out of the war. The AFC held rallies across the United
States, and its posters, brochures, and broadsides warn-
ing against American involvement in Europe suffused
many parts of the country, especially the Midwest.

Because of the America Firsters’ efforts, Roosevelt
proceeded cautiously in 1940 as he moved the United
States  closer  to  involvement.  The  president  did  not
want war, but he believed that most Americans “greatly
underestimate  the  serious  implications  to  our  own
future,” as he confided to White. In May, Roosevelt cre-
ated the National Defense Advisory Commission and
brought  two  prominent  Republicans,  Henry  Stimson
and Frank Knox, into his cabinet as secretaries of war
and  the  navy,  respectively.  During  the  summer,  the
president traded fifty World War I destroyers to Great
Britain in exchange for the right to build military bases
on  British  possessions  in  the  Atlantic,  circumventing
neutrality laws by using an executive order to complete

CHAPTER 24

  The World at War, 1937–1945

771

the  deal.  In  October  1940,  a  bipartisan  vote  in  Con-
gress  approved  a  large  increase  in  defense  spending
and  instituted  the  first  peacetime  draft  in  American
history. “We must be the great arsenal of democracy,”
FDR declared.

As the war in Europe and the Pacific expanded, the
United States was preparing for the 1940 presidential
election.  The  crisis  had  convinced  Roosevelt  to  seek
an unprecedented third term. The Republicans nomi-
nated Wendell Willkie of Indiana, a former Democrat
who supported many New Deal policies. The two par-
ties’ platforms differed only slightly. Both pledged aid
to  the  Allies,  and  both  candidates  promised  not  to
“send an American boy into the shambles of a Euro-
pean war,” as Willkie put it. Willkie’s spirited campaign
resulted in a closer election than that of 1932 or 1936;
nonetheless,  Roosevelt  won  55  percent  of  the  popu-
lar vote.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
How did Roosevelt use
the Four Freedoms speech
and the Atlantic Charter
to deﬁne the war for
Americans?

Having  been  reelected,  Roosevelt  now  undertook
to persuade Congress to increase aid to Britain, whose
survival  he  viewed  as  key  to  American  security.  In
January 1941, he delivered one of
the  most  important  speeches  of
his  career.  Defining  “four  essen-
tial  human  freedoms” — freedom
of  speech,  freedom  of  religion,
freedom from want, and freedom
from  fear — Roosevelt  cast  the
war  as  a  noble  defense  of  demo-
cratic  societies.  He  then  linked
the fate of democracy in Western Europe with the new
welfare state at home. Sounding a decidedly New Deal
note,  Roosevelt  pledged  to  end  “special  privileges  for
the  few”  and  to  preserve  “civil  liberties  for  all.”  Like
President  Wilson’s  speech  championing  national  self-
determination at the close of World War I, Roosevelt’s
“Four  Freedoms”  speech  outlined  a  liberal  interna-
tional  order  with  appeal  well  beyond  its  intended
European and American audiences.

To see a longer excerpt of the “Four Freedoms”
speech, along with other primary sources from this
period, see Sources for America’s History.

Two months later, in March 1941, with Britain no
longer able to pay cash for arms, Roosevelt persuaded
Congress  to  pass  the  Lend-Lease  Act.  The  legislation
authorized the president to “lease, lend, or otherwise
dispose of ” arms and equipment to Britain or any other
country  whose  defense  was  considered  vital  to  the
security of the United States. When Hitler abandoned
his  nonaggression  pact  with  Stalin  and  invaded  the

