772

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Soviet Union in June 1941, the United States extended
lend-lease to the Soviets. The implementation of lend-
lease  marked  the  unofficial  entrance  of  the  United
States into the European war.

Roosevelt  underlined  his  support  for  the  Allied
cause  by  meeting  in  August  1941  with  British  prime
minister  Winston  Churchill  (who  had  succeeded
Chamberlain in 1940). Their joint press release, which
became  known  as  the  Atlantic  Charter,  provided  the
ideological foundation of the Western cause. Drawing
from  Wilson’s  Fourteen  Points  and  Roosevelt’s  Four
Freedoms,  the  charter  called  for  economic  coopera-
tion,  national  self-determination,  and  guarantees  of
political stability after the war to ensure “that all men in
all the lands may live out their lives in freedom from
fear  and  want.”  It  would  become  the  basis  for  a  new
American-led transatlantic alliance after the war’s con-
clusion.  Its  promise  of  national  self-determination,

however, set  up potential conflict in Asia and Africa,
where  European  powers  would  be  reluctant  to  aban-
don their imperial holdings.

In the fall of 1941, the reality of U.S. involvement in
the war drew closer. By September, Nazi U-boats and
the American navy were exchanging fire in the Atlantic.
With  isolationists  still  a  potent  force,  Roosevelt  hesi-
tated to declare war and insisted that the United States
would  defend  itself  only  against  a  direct  attack.  But
behind  the  scenes,  the  president  openly  discussed
American involvement with close advisors and consid-
ered war inevitable.

The Attack on Pearl Harbor
The  crucial  provocation  came  not  from  Germany
but  from  Japan.  After  Japan  invaded  China  in  1937,
Roosevelt had denounced “the present reign of terror

One City (and Island) at a Time

By late 1944, the victory of the United States
and its allies was nearly certain, but Japanese
and German troops continued to ﬁght with
great courage and determination. Many Euro-
pean cities and every Paciﬁc island had to be
taken foot by foot. Here, American troops
from the 325th Regiment of the 82nd Air-
borne Division advance slowly through the
rubble-ﬁlled street of a German city in early
1945. Jeff Ethell Color Archives.

