CHAPTER 24

  The World at War, 1937–1945

773

and  international  lawlessness”  and  suggested  that
aggressors  be  “quarantined”  by  peaceful  nations.
Despite  such  rhetoric,  the  United  States  refused  to
intervene later that year when Japanese troops sacked
the  city  of  Nanjing,  massacred  300,000  Chinese  resi-
dents, and raped thousands of women.

FDR and other American officials prioritized events
in Europe over those in East Asia, and without a coun-
terweight,  Japan’s  military  and  imperial  ambitions
expanded. In 1940, General Hideki Tojo became war
minister.  After  concluding  a  formal  military  alliance
with Germany and Italy that year, Tojo dispatched Japa-
n ese troops to occupy the northern part of the French
colony of Indochina (present-day Vietnam, Cambodia,
and Laos). Tojo’s goal, supported by Emp eror Hirohito,
was to create a “Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere”
under  Japan’s  control  stretching  from  the  Korean
Peninsula south to Indonesia. Like Germany and Italy,
Japan sought to match the overseas empires of Britain,
France, Holland, and the United States.

The  United  States  responded  to  the  stationing  of
Japanese troops in Indochina by restricting trade with
Japan. Roosevelt hoped that these economic sanctions
would  deter  Japanese  aggression.  But  in  July  1941,
Japanese  troops  staged  a  full-scale  invasion  of  Indo-
china.  Roosevelt  then  froze  Japanese  assets  in  the
United States and stopped all trade with Japan, includ-
ing  vital  oil  shipments  that  accounted  for  almost  80
percent of Japanese consumption.

In October 1941, General Tojo became prime min-
ister and accelerated secret preparations for war against
the  United  States.  By  November,  American  military
intelligence  knew  that  Japan  was  planning  an  attack
but  did  not  know  where  it  would  occur.  Early  on
Sunday morning, December 7, 1941, Japanese bomb-
ers attacked Pearl Harbor in Hawaii, killing more than
2,400 Americans. They destroyed or heavily damaged
eight battleships, three cruisers, three destroyers, and
almost two hundred airplanes.

Although the assault was devastating, it united the
American  people.  Calling  December  7  “a  date  which
will live in infamy,” President Roosevelt asked Congress
for a declaration of war against Japan. The Senate voted
unanimously  for  war,  and  the  House  concurred  by
a  vote  of  388  to  1.  The  lone  dissenter  was  Jeannette
Rankin  of  Montana,  a  committed  pacifist — she  also
voted  against  entry  into  World  War  I — and  the  first
female member of Congress. Three days later, Germany
and Italy declared war on the United States, which in
turn declared war on the Axis powers. The long shad-
ows of two wars, one in Europe and one in Asia, had at
long last converged over the United States.

Organizing for Victory
The  task  of  fighting  on  a  global  scale  dramatically
increased the power of the federal government. Shifting
from  civilian  to  military  production,  raising  an  army,
and assembling the necessary workforce required a mas-
sive expansion in government authority. When Congress
passed the War Powers Act in December 1941, it gave
President  Roosevelt  unprecedented  control  over  all
aspects of the war effort. This act marked the beginning
of what some historians call the imperial presidency: the
far-reaching  use  (and  sometimes  abuse)  of  executive
authority during the latter part of the twentieth century.

Financing the War
Defense mobilization, not the New Deal efforts of the
1930s, ended the Great Depression. Between 1940 and
1945, the annual gross national product doubled, and
after-tax profits of American businesses nearly doubled
(America Compared, p. 774). Federal spending on war
production  powered  this  advance.  By  late  1943,  two-
thirds of the economy was directly involved in the war
effort  (Figure  24.1).  The  government  paid  for  these

FIGURE 24.1
Government Military and Civilian Spending as
a Percentage of GDP, 1920–1980

Government military spending was about
3 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP)
in the 1920s and 1930s, but it ballooned to
more than 25 percent during World War II,
to 13 percent during the Korean War, and
to nearly 10 percent during the Vietnam War.
Federal government spending for civilian
purposes doubled during the New Deal
and has remained at about 17 to 20 per-
cent of GDP ever since.

40

30

20

10

P
D
G

f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

Nondefense

Defense

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

