A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

The Scales of War:

Losses and Gains

During World War II

World  War  II  saw  an  extraordinary  loss  of  life.  Worldwide,  at  least  50  million
people perished between 1939 and 1945 from war-related causes. The majority
of those who died were civilians, though many millions of soldiers perished in
battle  as  well.  For  most  countries,  we  have  reasonable  estimates  rather  than
precise ﬁgures. The chart below compares the United States with other major
combatants and nations caught in this global struggle.

On the other side of the scale, the war fueled tremendous economic growth,
at  least  in  the  United  States,  which  was  spared  the  physical  devastation  of
Europe  and  East  Asia.  Military  production  for  World  War  II  lifted  the  United
States out of the Great Depression. Gross domestic product (GDP) nearly dou-
bled between 1938 and 1945. Economic production in other combatant nations,
as shown in the second ﬁgure, grew little if at all.

23 million

15 million

6 million

6 million

1,600

1,400

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

s
e
c
i
r
p
0
9
9
1
n
i
n
o
i
l
l
i
b
n
i
$

3 million

500,000 500,000

2 million

France

U.K.

Japan

Poland

U.S.S.R

China

Germany

Yugoslavia

420,000

U.S.

0
1938

1939

1940

1941

1942

1943

1944

1945

U.S.
U.S.S.R.
Germany

U.K.
Japan

Italy
France

FIGURE 24.2
World War II Military and Civilian Deaths, 1939–1945

FIGURE 24.3
Gross Domestic Product Rates Worldwide, 1938–1945

Source: GDP data adapted From Mark Harrison, “The Economics of World War II: Six Great Powers” in International Comparison (1998), 11. Copyright © 1998
Cambridge University Press. Reprinted by permission of Cambridge University Press.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Why did the United States experience so many fewer deaths
than other nations? Why were there so many deaths in East-
ern Europe and the Soviet Union?

2.  Note the relative position of U.S. GDP to other indus-
trial nations in 1938 and in 1945. How were some of
the key domestic changes discussed in the chapter, such

as rural-urban migration, racial conﬂict, and women’s
employment, linked to this economic growth?

3.  How might you use these comparisons to add to your

understanding of key wartime developments, such as the
Holocaust, Stalin’s demand for a second front, or the entry
of the United States into the war?

774

