CHAPTER 24

  The World at War, 1937–1945

775

military expenditures by raising taxes and borrowing
money. The Revenue Act of 1942 expanded the num-
ber of people paying income taxes from 3.9 million to
42.6 million. Taxes on personal incomes and business
profits paid half the cost of the war. The government
borrowed the rest, both from wealthy Americans and
from  ordinary  citizens,  who  invested  in  long-term
treasury bonds known as war bonds.

Financing and coordinating the war effort required
far-reaching  cooperation  between  government  and
private business. The number of civilians employed by
the government increased almost fourfold, to 3.8 mil-
lion — a  far  higher  rate  of  growth  than  that  during
the  New  Deal.  The  powerful  War  Production  Board
(WPB)  awarded  defense  contracts,  allocated  scarce
resources — such as rubber, copper, and oil — for mili-
tary uses, and persuaded businesses to convert to mili-
tary production. For example, it encouraged Ford and
General  Motors  to  build  tanks  rather  than  cars  by
granting  generous  tax  advantages  for  re-equipping
existing  factories  and  building  new  ones.  In  other
instances,  the  board  approved  “cost-plus”  contracts,
which  guaranteed  corporations  a  profit,  and  allowed
them to keep new steel mills, factories, and shipyards
after  the  war.  Such  government  subsidies  of  defense

industries  would  intensify  during  the  Cold  War  and
continue to this day.

To  secure  maximum  production,  the  WPB  pre-
ferred to deal with major enterprises rather than with
small businesses. The nation’s fifty-six largest corpora-
tions  received  three-fourths  of  the  war  contracts;  the
top ten received one-third. The best-known contractor
was  Henry  J.  Kaiser.  Already  highly  successful  from
building roads in California and the Hoover and Grand
Coulee  dams,  Kaiser  went  from
government construction work to
navy  shipbuilding.  At  his  ship-
yard in Richmond, California, he
revolutionized  ship  construction
by  applying  Henry  Ford’s  tech-
niques  of  mass  production.  To
meet  wartime production sched-
ules, Kaiser broke the work process down into small,
specialized tasks that newly trained workers could do
easily.  Soon,  each  of  his  work  crews  was  building  a
“Liberty Ship,” a large vessel to carry cargo and troops
to  the  war  zone,  every  two  weeks.  The  press  dubbed
him the Miracle Man.

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did the war affect the
relationship between pri-
vate corporations and the
federal government?

Central  to  Kaiser’s  success  were  his  close  ties  to
federal  agencies.  The  government  financed  the  great

Shipyards in Wartime

The shipyard workers shown
here are laying the keel of the
Joseph N. Teal, a 10,500-ton
“Liberty” freighter bound for
the war in the Paciﬁc in 1942.
Amidst scaffolding, tools, and
wires, these workers at Henry J.
Kaiser’s shipyard in Portland,
Oregon, constructed the entire
ship in just ten days after the
keel was laid, to shatter all
previous shipbuilding records.
Kaiser was the king of ship-
building on the West Coast,
with massive yards in Portland
and the San Francisco Bay area.
In all, Kaiser’s workers built
nearly 1,500 ships in three
years, one-quarter of the
total constructed during the
war. © Bettmann/Corbis.

