776

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

dams  that  he  built  during  the  depression,  and  the
Reconstruction  Finance  Corporation  lent  him  $300
million  to  build  shipyards  and  manufacturing  plants
during the war. Working together in this way, American
business  and  government  turned  out  a  prodigious
supply of military hardware: 86,000 tanks; 296,000 air-
planes;  15  million  rifles  and  machine  guns;  64,000
landing craft; and 6,500 cargo ships and naval vessels.
The  American  way  of  war,  wrote  the  Scottish  histo-
rian D. W. Brogan in 1944, was “mechanized like the
American  farm  and  kitchen.”  America’s  productive
industrial economy, as much as or more than its troops,
proved the decisive factor in winning World War II.

The  system  of  allotting  contracts,  along  with  the
suspension  of  antitrust  prosecutions  during  the  war,
created giant corporate enterprises. By 1945, the largest
one  hundred  American  companies  produced  70  per-
cent  of  the  nation’s  industrial  output.  These  corpora-
tions would form the core of what became known as
the  nation’s  “military-industrial  complex”  during  the
Cold War (Chapter 25).

Mobilizing the American
Fighting Force
The expanding federal bureaucracy also had a human
face.  To  fight  the  war,  the  government  mobilized
tens  of  millions  of  soldiers,  civilians,  and  workers —
coordinated on a scale unprecedented in U.S. history.
During World War II, the armed forces of the United
States  enlisted  more  than  fifteen  million  men  and
women.  In  no  other  military  conflict  have  so  many
American citizens served in the armed services. They
came  from  every  region  and  economic  station:  black
sharecroppers from Alabama; white farmers from the
Midwest; the sons and daughters of European, Mexi-
can,  and  Caribbean  immigrants;  native  men  from
Navajo  and  Choctaw  reservations  and  other  tribal
communities;  women  from  every  state  in  the  nation;
even  Hollywood  celebrities.  From  urban,  rural,  and
suburban areas, from working-class and middle-class
backgrounds — they all served in the military.

In  contrast  to  its  otherwise  democratic  character,
the American army segregated the nearly one million
African  Americans  in  uniform.  The  National  Asso-
ciation  for  the  Advancement  of  Colored  People
(NAACP)  and  other  civil  rights  groups  reprimanded
the  government,  saying,  “A  Jim  Crow  army  cannot
fight  for  a  free  world,”  but  the  military  continued  to
separate  African  Americans  and  assign  them  menial
duties. The poet Langston Hughes observed the irony:
“We are elevator boys, janitors, red caps, maids — a race

in  uniform.”  The  military  uniform,  Hughes  implied,
was not assigned to African Americans so readily. Native
Americans and Mexican Americans, on the other hand,
were  never  officially  segregated;  they  rubbed  elbows
with the sons of European immigrants and native-born
soldiers from all regions of the country.

Among  the  most  instrumental  soldiers  were  the
Native American “code talkers.” In the Pacific theater,
native  Navajo  speakers  communicated  orders  to  fleet
commanders. Japanese intelligence could not decipher
the code because it was based on the Navajo language,
which fewer than fifty non-Navajos in the world under-
stood. At the battle of Iwo Jima, for instance — one of
the war’s fiercest — Navajo code talkers, working around
the clock, sent and received more than eight hundred
messages without error. In the European theater, army
commanders used Comanche, Choctaw, and Cherokee
speakers to thwart the Nazis and exchange crucial mil-
itary commands on the battlefield. No Axis nation ever
broke these Native American codes.

Approximately 350,000 American women enlisted
in the military. About 140,000 served in the Women’s
Army Corps (WAC), and 100,000 served in the navy’s
Women  Accepted  for  Volunteer  Emergency  Service
(WAVES). One-third of the nation’s registered nurses,
almost 75,000 overall, volunteered for military duty. In
addition, about 1,000 Women’s Airforce Service Pilots
(WASPs)  ferried  planes  and  supplies  in  noncombat
areas. The armed forces limited the duties assigned to
women, however. Female officers could not command
men, and WACs and WAVES were barred from com-
bat duty, although nurses of both sexes served close to
the  front  lines,  risking  capture  or  death.  Most  of  the
jobs  that  women  did  in  the  military — clerical  work,
communications,  and  health  care — resembled  wom-
en’s jobs in civilian life.

Historians  still  debate  how  to  characterize  the
World  War  II  American  military.  As  an  army  of
“citizen-soldiers,” it represented a wide stratum of soci-
ety. Military service gave a generation of men a noble
purpose,  following  a  decade  of  economic  depression.
And its ethic of patriotism further advanced the chil-
dren  of  immigrants  into  mainstream  American  life.
Yet the military embodied the tensions and contradic-
tions  of  American  society  as  well.  The  draft  revealed
appalling levels of health, fitness, and education among
millions  of  Americans,  spurring  reformers  to  call
for improved literacy and nutrition. Women’s integra-
tion  into  the  military  was  marked  by  deep  anxieties
about  their  potentially  negative  effects  on  male  sol-
diers as well as the threat to “womanhood” posed by
service. The American army was like the nation itself.

