CHAPTER 24

  The World at War, 1937–1945

777

United in wartime purpose, the military reflected the
strengths and weaknesses of a diverse, fractious society.

Workers and the War Effort
As millions of working-age citizens joined the military,
the nation faced a critical labor shortage. Consequently,
many women and African Americans joined the indus-
trial workforce, taking jobs unavailable to them before
the conflict. Unions, benefitting from the demand for
labor,  negotiated  higher  wages  and  improved  condi-
tions for America’s workers. By 1943, with the economy
operating  at  full  capacity,  the  breadlines  and  double-
digit unemployment of the 1930s were a memory.

Rosie the Riveter  Government officials and corpo-
rate  recruiters  urged  women  to  take  jobs  in  defense
industries,  creating  a  new  image  of  working  women.
“Longing won’t bring him back sooner . . . get a war
job!” one poster urged, while artist Norman Rockwell’s
famous  “Rosie  the  Riveter”  illustration  beckoned  to
women  from  the  cover  of  the  Saturday  Evening  Post.
The  government  directed  its  publicity  at  housewives,
but  many  working  women  gladly  abandoned  low-
paying “women’s jobs” as domestic servants or secre-
taries for higher-paying work in the defense industry.
Sud denly, the nation’s factories were full of women work-
ing  as  airplane  riveters,  ship  welders,  and  drill-press

operators (American Voices, p. 778). Women made up
36 percent of the labor force in 1945, compared with
24 percent at the beginning of the war. War work did
not free women from traditional expectations and lim-
itations,  however.  Women  often  faced  sexual  harass-
ment on the job and usually received lower wages than
men did. In shipyards, women with the most seniority
and responsibility earned $6.95 a day, whereas the top
men made as much as $22.

Wartime  work  was  thus  bittersweet  for  women,
because it combined new opportunities with old con-
straints. The majority labored in low-wage service jobs.
Child  care  was  often  unavailable,  despite  the  largest
government-sponsored child-care program in history.
When  the  men  returned  from  war,  Rosie  the  Riveter
was usually out of a job. Government propaganda now
encouraged  women  back  into  the  home — where,  it
was  implied,  their  true  calling  lay  in  raising  families
and standing behind the returning soldiers. But many
married women refused, or could not afford, to put on
aprons  and  stay  home.  Women’s  participation  in  the
paid labor force rebounded by the late 1940s and con-
tinued  to  rise  over  the  rest  of  the  twentieth  century,
bringing major changes in family life (Chapter 26).

Wartime Civil Rights  Among African Americans, a
new  militancy  prevailed  during  the  war.  Pointing  to
parallels between anti-Semitism in Germany and racial

Rosie the Riveter

Women workers install ﬁxtures
and assemblies to a tail fuselage
section of a B-17 bomber at the
Douglas Aircraft Company plant
in Long Beach, California. To
entice women to become war
workers, the War Manpower
Commission created the image
of “Rosie the Riveter,” later
immortalized in posters and
by a Norman Rockwell illustra-
tion on the cover of the Saturday
Evening Post. A popular 1942
song celebrating Rosie went:
“Rosie’s got a boyfriend, Charlie /
Charlie, he’s a marine / Rosie is
protecting Charlie / Working over-
time on the riveting machine.”
Even as women joined the indus-
trial workforce in huge numbers
(half a million in the aircraft
industry alone), they were
understood as fulﬁlling a
nurturing, protective role.
Library of Congress.

