A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Women in the Wartime

Workplace

During  World  War  II,  millions  of  men  served  in  the  armed  forces  and  millions
of  women  worked  in  war-related  industries.  A  generation  later,  some  of
these women workers recounted their wartime experiences to historians in oral
interviews.

Evelyn Gotzion
Becoming a Union Activist

Evelyn Gotzion went to work at Rayovac, a battery com-
pany in Madison, Wisconsin, in 1935; she retired in 1978.
While  at  Rayovac,  Gotzion  and  her  working  husband
raised three children.

I had all kinds of jobs. [During the war] we had one line,
a big line, where you’d work ten hours and you’d stand in
one spot or sit in one spot. It got terrible, all day long. So
I suggested to my foreman, the general foreman, that we
take turns of learning everybody’s job and switching
every half hour. Well, they [the management] didn’t like
it, but we were on the side, every once in a while, learning
each other’s job and learning how to do it, so eventually
most all of us got so we could do all the jobs, [of] which
there were probably fifteen or twenty on the line. We
could do every job so we could go up and down the line
and rotate. And then they found out that that was really
a pretty good thing to do because it made the people
happier. . . .

One day I was the steward, and they wouldn’t listen to
me. They cut our rates, so I shut off the line, and the boss
came up and he said, “What are you doing?” I said, “Well,
I have asked everybody that I know why we have gotten a
cut in pay and why we’re doing exactly the same amount
of work as we did.” . . . So, anyhow, we wrote up a big griev-
ance and they all signed it and then I called the president
of the union and then we had a meeting. . . . At that point
the president decided that I should be added to the bar-
gaining committee so that I would go in and argue our
case, because I could do it better than any of the rest of
them because I knew what it was. . . . We finally got it
straightened out, and we got our back pay, too. From
then on I was on the bargaining committee all the years
that I worked at Rayovac.

Source: Women Remember the War, 1941–1945, edited by Michael E. Stevens and
Ellen D. Goldlust (State Historical Society of Wisconsin Press, 1993). Reprinted with
permission of the Wisconsin Historical Society.

Donna Jean Harvey
Wartime Challenges and New Experiences

During the war Harvey raised her ﬁrst child while working
as  a  riveter  and  radio  installer  at  a  plant  in  Cheyenne,
Wyoming.

I graduated from Cheyenne High School in 1940. I
married Lewis Early Harvey in January 1941. He was
drafted when the war broke out and was sent to the
Aleutian Islands, and from there he transferred to the
Paratroopers. In October I gave birth to my first son,
Lewis Early Jr.

Labor force was critical at that time so I went to
United Modification Plant and learned how to rivet, do
installations of various kinds and etc. When the “new”
radar system was implemented, I asked to be put on
that crew. The F.B.I. investigated me and found me to
be worthy and I proceeded to install radar along with
my riveting duties, while waiting for the next shipment
of planes to come in. . . . I was awarded the Army-Navy
E Award and was presented with a pin. I’ve always been
very proud of that!!! I certainly got educated in more
ways than I ever expected, being a very young girl. But
looking back I wouldn’t trade my experiences for
anything.

My feeling about the war in most instances was a
conglomerate of mixed emotions. I had lived a fairly
sheltered life, but I listened and learned and managed
to survive, but I must admit, it left a scar on my memory
that can never be erased.

I was living in one of my parent’s apartments during
the war and since they were both retired, they baby-sat
my young son. My mother decided after a while that she
too would like to do something in some little way to help.
So she applied for maintenance and between my father
and the girl next door, I managed to have a baby-sitter
available at all times. The government was asking for
rubber donations so my mother and I gave them our
rubber girdles!! We liked to think that our girdles
helped win the war!!!

778

