My life took on a totally new perspective the longer I
worked there. I saw many tragic accidents, none of which
I care to talk about which haunt me to this day.

I couldn’t do much socializing as I had a small infant
at home to care for when off work and besides I was really
pooped. Those midnight shifts were “killers.” I hope I
never have to do that again!! I tried to write weekly letters
to my husband in between my other duties. . . .

Our community gathered together and collected scrap

metals and such to help in the war effort and thanks to a
good neighbor, who was growing a victory garden; we
managed to get gifts of potatoes and lettuce etc. The gov-
ernment issued coupon books that allowed us two
bananas a week, one pound of sugar and so many gallons
of gas. We traded back and forth depending on our indi-
vidual needs. I had a 1934 Ford and fortunately, it wasn’t a
gas eater and it managed to get me where I was going
when I needed it. . . .

There were no unions there at that time and no baby
sitting service provided. The single people formed a club
and they entertained themselves after work but I was a
married person with a child and so I didn’t participate in
any of their activities. . . .

After the war was over, most people went back to their

previous jobs. I opened a beauty salon and when my hus-
band returned home from the service he got a job with
the Frontier Refinery.

Source: National Park Service, Rosie the Riveter: Women Working During World War II,
nps. gov/pwro/collection/website/donna.htm.

Fanny Christina (Tina) Hill
War Work: Social and Racial Mobility

After migrating to Cal i fornia from Texas and working as a
domestic  servant,  Tina  Hill,  an  African  American,  got  a
wartime job at North American Aircraft. After time off for
a pregnancy in 1945, Hill worked there until 1980.

Most of the men was gone, and . . .  most of the women
was in my bracket, five or six years younger or older. I
was twenty-four. There was a black girl that hired in with
me. I went to work the next day, sixty cents an hour. . . .  I
 could see where they made a difference in placing you in
certain jobs. They had fifteen or twenty departments, but
all the Negroes went to Department 17 because there was

nothing but shooting and bucking rivets. You stood on
one side of the panel and your partner stood on this side
and he would shoot the rivets with a gun and you’d buck
them with the bar. That was about the size of it. I just
 didn’t like it . . .  went over to the union and they told me
what to do. I went back inside and they sent me to
another department where you did bench work and I
liked that much better. . . .

Some weeks I brought home twenty-six dollars . . .
then it gradually went up to thirty dollars [about $420 in
2010]. . . .  Whatever you make you’re supposed to save
some. I was also getting that fifty dollars a month from
my husband and that was just saved right away. I was
planning on buying a home and a car. . . .  My husband
came back [from the war, and] . . .  looked for a job in the
cleaning and pressing place, which was just plentiful. . . .
That’s why he  didn’t bother to go out to North American.
But what we both  weren’t thinking about was that they
[North American] have better benefits because they did
have an insurance plan and a union to back you up. Later
he did come to work there, in 1951 or 1952. . . .

When North American called me back [after I left to
have a baby,] was I a happy soul! . . .  It made me live bet-
ter. It  really did.We always say that Lincoln took the bale
off of the Negroes. I think there is a statue up there in
Washington, D.C., where he’s lifting something off the
Negro. Well, my sister always said — that’s why you can’t
interview her because she’s so radical — “Hitler was the
one that got us out of the white folks’ kitchen.”

Source: Rosie the Riveter Revisited, by Sherna B. Gluck (Boston: G.K. Hall & Co., 1987).
Used by permission of Susan Berger Gluck.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  How did the war change the lives of these women?
2.  Consider how the themes of identity and work, technol-
ogy, and economic change, connect to the lives of these
two women. How was their experience of the wartime
industrial workplace tied to their class and gender iden-
tities? How did labor unions affect their conditions of
employment?

3.  These interviews occurred long after the events they

describe. How might that long interval have affected the
women’s accounts of those years?

779

