CHAPTER 24

  The World at War, 1937–1945

781

and  private  employers  to  end  anti-Mexican  discrimi-
nation. Mexican American workers themselves, often
in Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) unions
such as the Cannery Workers and Shipyard Workers,
also  led  efforts  to  enforce  the  FEPC’s  equal  employ-
ment mandate.

Exploitation persisted, however. To meet  wartime
labor  demands,  the  U.S.  government  brought  tens  of
thousands of Mexican contract laborers into the United
States  under  the  Bracero  Program.  Paid  little  and
treated poorly, the braceros (who took their name from
the  Spanish  brazo,  “arm”)  highlighted  the  oppressive
conditions of farm labor in the United States. After the
war, the federal government continued to participate in
labor exploitation, bringing hundreds of thousands of
Mexicans into the country to perform low-wage agri-
cultural  work.  Future  Mexican  American  civil  rights
leaders  Dolores  Huerta  and  Cesar  Chavez  began  to
fight this labor system in the 1940s.

Organized Labor  During the war, unions solidified
their position as the most powerful national voice for
American  workers  and  extended  gains  made  during
the  New  Deal.  By  1945,  almost  15  million  workers
belonged  to  a  union,  up  from  9  million  in  1939.
Representatives of the major unions made a no-strike
pledge  for  the  duration  of  the  war,  and  Roosevelt
rewarded  them  by  creating  the  National  War  Labor
Board (NWLB), composed of representatives of labor,
management,  and  the  public.  The  NWLB  established
wages,  hours,  and  working  conditions  and  had  the
authority  to  seize  manufacturing  plants  that  did  not
comply.  The  Board’s  “maintenance  of  membership”
policy,  which  encouraged  workers  in  major  defense
industries to join unions, also helped organized labor
grow.

Despite these arrangements, unions endured gov-
ernment  constraints  and  faced  a  sometimes  hostile
Congress. Frustrated with limits on wage increases and
the no-strike pledge, in 1943 more than half a million
United Mine Workers went out on strike, demanding
a  higher  wage  increase  than  that  recommended  by
the  NWLB.  Congress  responded  by  passing  (over
Roosevelt’s  veto)  the  Smith-Connally  Labor  Act  of
1943, which allowed the president to prohibit strikes in
defense industries and forbade political contributions
by unions. Congressional hostility would continue to
hamper  the  union  movement  in  the  postwar  years.
Although organized labor would emerge from World
War II more powerful than at any time in U.S. history,
its  business  and  corporate  opponents,  too,  would
emerge from the war with new strength.

Politics in Wartime
In his 1944 State of the Union address, FDR called for a
second  Bill  of  Rights,  one  that  would  guarantee  all
Americans access to education and jobs, adequate food
and  clothing,  and  decent  housing  and  medical  care.
Like his Four Freedoms speech, this was a call to extend
the  New  Deal  by  broadening  the  rights  to  individual
security  and  welfare  guaranteed  by  the  government.
The answer to his call, however, would have to wait for
the  war’s  conclusion.  Congress  created  new  govern-
ment  benefits  only  for  military  veterans,  known  as
GIs  (short  for  “government  issue”). The  Servicemen’s
Readjustment Act (1944), an extraordinarily influential
program  popularly  known  as  the  “GI  Bill  of  Rights,”
provided  education,  job  training,  medical  care,  pen-
sions,  and  mortgage  loans  for  men  and  women  who
had served in the armed forces (Chapter 26).

The president’s call for social legislation sought to
reinvigorate  the  New  Deal  political  coalition.  In  the
election  of  1944,  Roosevelt  again  headed  the  Demo-
cratic ticket. But party leaders, aware of FDR’s health
problems  and  fearing  that  Vice  President  Henry
Wallace’s outspoken support for labor and civil rights
would alienate moderate voters, dropped him from the
ticket. In his place, they chose Senator Harry S. Truman
of  Missouri,  a  straight-talking,  no-nonsense  politi-
cian  with  little  national  experience.  The  Republicans
nominated Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York.
Dewey, who accepted the general principles of welfare-
state liberalism domestically and favored internation-
alism  in  foreign  affairs,  attracted  some  of  Roosevelt’s
supporters. But a majority of voters preferred political
continuity, and Roosevelt was reelected with 53.5 per-
cent of the nationwide vote. The Democratic coalition
retained its hold on government power, and the era of
Republican  political  dominance  (1896–1932)  slipped
further into the past.

Life on the Home Front
The United States escaped the physical devastation that
ravaged Europe and East Asia, but the war profoundly
changed  the  country.  Americans  welcomed  wartime
prosperity  but  shuddered  when  they  saw  a  Western
Union  boy  on  his  bicycle,  fearing  that  he  carried  a
War Department telegram reporting the death of some-
one’s  son,  husband,  or  father.  Citizens  also  grumbled
about annoying wartime regulations and rationing but
accepted  that  their  lives  would  be  different  “for  the
duration.”

