782

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

A Family Effort

After migrating from the Midwest to Portland, Oregon, ﬁfteen members of the family of John R. Brauckmiller
(sixth from left) found jobs at Henry Kaiser’s Swan Island shipyard. From 1943 to 1945, the shipyard turned
out 152 T-2 Tankers, mostly for use by the U.S. Navy to carry fuel oil. A local newspaper pronounced the
Brauckmillers as “the shipbuildingest family in America,” and because of the importance of shipbuilding to
the war effort, Life magazine featured the family in its issue of August 16, 1943. Ralph Vincent, The Journal,
Portland, Oregon/Picture Research Consultants & Archives.

“For the Duration”
Spurred by both government propaganda and a desire
to serve the war cause, people on the home front took
on  wartime  responsibilities.  They  worked  on  civilian
defense  committees,  recycled  old  newspapers  and
scrap material, and served on local rationing and draft
boards.  About  twenty  million  backyard  “victory  gar-
dens”  produced  40 percent  of  the  nation’s  vegetables.
Various  federal  agencies  encouraged  these  efforts,
especially the Office of War Information (OWI), which
disseminated  news  and  promoted  patriotism.  The
OWI  urged  advertising  agencies  to  link  their  clients’
products  to  the  war  effort,  arguing  that  patriotic  ads

would not only sell goods but also “invigorate, instruct
and inspire” citizens (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 784).
Popular  culture,  especially  the  movies,  reinforced
connections  between  the  home  front  and  the  war
effort.  Hollywood  producers,  directors,  and  actors
offered their talents to the War Department. Director
Frank Capra created a documentary series titled Why
We Fight to explain war aims to conscripted soldiers.
Movie  stars  such  as  John  Wayne  and  Spencer  Tracy
portrayed heroic American fighting men in numerous
films,  such  as  Guadalcanal  Diary  (1943)  and  Thirty
Seconds  over  Tokyo  (1945).  In  this  pretelevision  era,
newsreels  accompanying  the  feature  films  kept  the
public up-to-date on the war, as did on-the-spot radio

