broadcasts  by  Edward  R.  Murrow  and  Mary  Marvin
Breckenridge,  the  first  female  radio  correspondent
for CBS.

For  many  Americans,  the  major  inconvenience
during  the  war  years  was  the  shortage  of  consumer
goods.  Beginning  in  1942,  federal  agencies  subjected
almost  everything  Americans  ate,  wore,  or  used  to
rationing  or  regulation.  The  first  major  scarcity  was
rubber. The Japanese conquest of Malaysia and Dutch
Indonesia  cut  off  97  percent  of  America’s  imports  of
that essential raw material. To conserve rubber for the
war effort, the government rationed tires, so many of
the nation’s 30 million car owners put their cars in stor-
age. As more people walked, they wore out their shoes.
In 1944, shoes were rationed to two pairs per person a
year. By 1943, the government was rationing meat, but-
ter,  sugar,  and  other  foods.  Most  citizens  cooperated
with the complicated rationing and coupon system, but
at least one-quarter of the population bought items on
the black market, especially meat, gasoline, cigarettes,
and nylon stockings.

Migration and the Wartime City
The  war  determined  where  people  lived.  When  men
entered  the  armed  services,  their  families  often  fol-
lowed them to training bases or points of debarkation.
Civilians  moved  to  take  high-paying  defense  jobs.
About 15 million Americans changed residences dur-
ing the war years, half of them moving to another state.
One of them was Peggy Terry, who grew up in Paducah,
Kentucky;  worked  in  a  shell-loading  plant  in  nearby
Viola; and then moved to a defense plant in Michigan.
There, she recalled, “I met all those wonderful Polacks
[Polish Americans]. They were the first people I’d ever
known that were any different from me. A whole new
world just opened up.”

As the center of defense production for the Pacific
war,  California  experienced  the  largest  share  of  war-
time migration. The state welcomed nearly three mil-
lion new residents and grew by 53 percent during the
war. “The Second Gold Rush Hits the West,” announced
the San Francisco Chronicle in 1943. One-tenth of all
federal  dollars  flowed  into  California,  and  the  state’s
factories  turned  out  one-sixth  of  all  war  materials.
People  went  where  the  defense  jobs  were:  to  Los
Angeles,  San  Diego,  and  cities  around  San  Francisco
Bay.  Some  towns  grew  practically  overnight;  within
two  years  of  the  opening  of  the  Kaiser  Corporation
shipyard in Richmond, California, the town’s popula-
tion had quadrupled. Other industrial states — notably
New York, Illinois, Michi gan, and Ohio — also attracted

CHAPTER 24

  The World at War, 1937–1945

783

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What effects did wartime
migration have on the
United States?

both federal dollars and migrants
on a large scale.

The  growth  of  war  industries
accelerated  patterns  of  rural-
urban migration. Cities grew dra-
matically,  as  factories,  shipyards,
and  other  defense  work  drew  millions  of  citizens
from small towns and rural areas. This new mobility,
coupled with people’s distance from their hometowns,
loosened  the  authority  of  traditional  institutions  and
made wartime cities vibrant and exciting. Around-the-
clock work shifts kept people on the streets night and
day, and bars, jazz clubs, dance halls, and movie the-
aters  proliferated,  fed  by  the  ready  cash  of  war
workers.

Racial  Conflict  Migration  and  more  fluid  social
boundaries  meant  that  people  of  different  races  and
ethnicities  mixed  in  the  booming  cities.  Over  one
million  African  Americans  left  the  rural  South  for
California, Illinois, Michigan, Ohio, and Pennsylvania —
a  continuation  of  the  Great  Migration  earlier  in  the
century (Chapter 21). As blacks and whites competed
for jobs and housing, racial conflicts broke out in more
than  a  hundred  cities  in  1943.  Detroit  saw  the  worst
violence. In June 1943, a riot incited by southern-born
whites  and  Polish  Americans  against  African  Ameri-
cans left thirty-four people dead and hundreds injured.
Racial  conflict  struck  the  West  as  well.  In  Los
Angeles,  male  Hispanic  teenagers  formed  pachuco
(youth)  gangs.  Many  dressed  in  “zoot  suits” —
broad-brimmed  felt  hats,  thigh-length  jackets  with
wide  lapels  and  padded  shoulders,  pegged  trousers,
and  clunky  shoes.  Pachucas  (young  women)  favored
long coats, huarache sandals, and pompadour hairdos.
Other working-class teenagers in Los Angeles and else-
where  took  up  the  zoot-suit  style  to  underline  their
rejection  of  middle-class  values.  To  many  adults,  the
zoot  suit  symbolized  juvenile  delinquency.  Rumors
circulating in Los Angeles in June 1943 that a pachuco
gang had beaten an Anglo (white) sailor set off a four-
day  riot  in  which  hundreds  of  Anglo  servicemen
roamed  through  Mexican  American  neighborhoods
and  attacked  zoot-suiters,  taking  special  pleasure  in
slashing  their  pegged  pants.  In  a  stinging  display  of
bias, Los Angeles police officers arrested only Mexican
American youth, and the City Council passed an ordi-
nance outlawing the wearing of the zoot suit.

Gay  and  Lesbian  Communities  Wartime  migra-
tion to urban centers created new opportunities for gay
men and women to establish communities. Religious

