T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Mobilizing the

Home Front

The  U.S.  Ofﬁce  of  War  Information  (OWI)  promoted  everything  from  food
rationing to car-pooling during World War II, and the U.S. Treasury encouraged
millions of Americans to buy war bonds. More than 20 million victory gardens
were planted by ordinary Americans. By 1944 they were producing more than
40  percent  of  all  vegetables  grown  in  the  United  States.  Through  these  and
other measures, those on the home front were encouraged to see themselves
as part of the war effort.

1.  U.S. government advertisement from the

Minneapolis Star Journal, 1943.

of us after our boy takes over on the farm. For after ten
years, we get four dollars back for every three we have
invested.”

3.  Poster from the U.S. Office of Price Administration,

1943.

John W. Hartman Center for Sales, Advertising and Marketing History, Duke
University.

2.  Copy from War Advertising Council/U.S. Treasury

Department advertisement, 1943.

Farmer: “Well, there’s something we really want now —
more than anything else . . . and I guess everybody does.
It’s VICTORY IN THIS WAR! We had started saving for a
new milking machine and a deep-well pump that we will
be needing in a few years. . . . We’re still going to have that
milking machine and that pump — and a lot of other new
improvements after the war. When our son comes home
from the fighting front, he’ll help us pick them out. And
we’ll have the cash to pay for them. With the money we
are saving now in War Bonds. And we are going to hang
on to as many War Bonds as possible to take care

784

United States Ofﬁce of Price Administration/Northwestern University Library.

