4.  4-H Club exhibiting victory garden posters, c. 1943.

“4-H club boys and girls” ID: 0016623, Special Collections Research Center,
North Carolina State University Libraries, Raleigh, North Carolina.

5.  Oral histories about life during the war.

Tessie Hickam Wilson, a young woman from Oklahoma.

It was a hard time, but we felt like we were doing our part,
and all the people we knew were doing their part. We had
rationing. Sugar, coffee, gasoline and meat were some of
the items that were hard to come by. We had ration books
every so often, and we had to use them sparingly. We
bought savings bonds to help in the war effort.

We also had radios and record players, and when we
could afford it, we went to the movies. And even though
there were hard times, we did what we could in the war
effort, and I will always be glad I was part of it.

Virginia J. Bondra, a student and clothing worker from
Ohio.

The only newsreel footage we saw was in the theaters
when we went to a movie. And we used to bring scrap
metal or cans, and we’d get in the movies free. They
needed scrap metal and they — the USA needed scrap
fat. My mother used to scrap fat, you know, in a can.
She’d save it, and we’d bring it to a certain place. Sugar
was rationed. Each member of the family would get one
pound of sugar a week. And I always had time to bake
because we had sugar. . . .

Different things were rationed. We couldn’t buy
nylons because it was needed . . . for parachutes. So
we’d — we’d — my older sisters would paint their legs
with a certain makeup that came out in place of
nylons. . . . It was makeup for legs.

They painted a eyebrow pencil line down the back of
their leg so it would look like real nylons. And we would

write V-mail. I had brother — brothers-in-law in the ser-
vice. We — we’d write V-mail to them. It was called V-mail.
Victory mail. . . . We couldn’t put their address on because
they were moved around a lot and we didn’t want the
enemy to know. There were a lot of secrets. They would
say “zip your lip was the” — was the word of the days
then. “Zip your lip” because we didn’t want the enemy
to get information.

Sources: (2) Digital Collections, Duke University Libraries; (4) National Park Service,
Rosie the Riveter: Women Working During World War II, and the Library of Congress
Veterans History Project.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE
1.  Examine sources 1, 2, and 3. Who created these sources,
and what does this suggest about the context and
purpose of these documents? Can you tell from their
content who the intended audience was?

2.  Study the photograph (source 4). Who is depicted, and
how were they posed? What does this suggest about
the victory garden program as well as war efforts on the
home front more broadly?

3.  How do the oral histories in source 5 add to your under-
standing of home front involvement in the war effort?
Does their testimony force you to question the other
documents in any way, and if so, how?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Analyze some of the ways the U.S. government encouraged
ordinary citizens to participate in the war effort, and evalu-
ate the objectives and results of these efforts.

785

