786

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Zoot-Suit Youth in Los Angeles

During a four-day riot in June 1943, ser-
vicemen in Los Angeles attacked young
Latino men wearing distinctive zoot suits,
which were widely viewed as emblems of
gang membership and a delinquent youth
culture. The police response was to arrest
scores of zoot-suiters. Here, a group of
handcuffed young Latino men is about to
board a Los Angeles County sheriff’s bus
to make a court appearance. Note the
wide-legged pants that taper at the ankle,
a hallmark of the zoot suit. The so-called
zoot-suit riot was evidence of cracks in
wartime unity on the home front. Library
of Congress.

morality  and  social  conventions  against  gays  and
lesbians kept the majority of them silent and their sex-
uality hidden. During the war, however, cities such as
New  York,  San  Francisco,  Los  Angeles,  Chicago,  and
even Kansas City, Buffalo, and Dallas developed vibrant

gay  neighborhoods,  sustained  in  part  by  a  sudden
influx  of  migrants  and  the  relatively  open  wartime
atmosphere.  These  communities  became  centers  of
the gay rights movement of the 1960s and 1970s (Chap-
ter 29).

New Urban Communities

Folk singer Pete Seeger performs at the opening of the Washington, D.C., labor canteen in 1944, sponsored
by the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO). Wartime migration brought people from across the coun-
try to centers of industry and military operations. Migration opened new possibilities for urban communities.
African American neighborhoods grew dramatically; urban populations grew younger and more mobile; and
gay and lesbian communities began to ﬂourish and become more visible. The Granger Collection, New York.

