The  military  tried  to  screen  out  homosexuals  but
had limited success. Once in the services, homosexuals
found  opportunities  to  participate  in  a  gay  culture
often  more  extensive  than  that  in  civilian  life.  In  the
last twenty years, historians have documented thriving
communities of gay and lesbian soldiers in the World
War II military. Some “came out under fire,” as one his-
torian put it, but most kept their sexuality hidden from
authorities, because army officers, doctors, and psychi-
atrists treated homosexuality as a psychological disor-
der that was grounds for dishonorable discharge.

Japanese Removal
Unlike World War I, which evoked widespread harass-
ment of German Americans, World War II produced
relatively little condemnation of European Americans.
Federal officials held about 5,000 potentially dangerous
German and Italian aliens during the war. Despite the
presence of small but vocal groups of Nazi sympathiz-
ers and Mussolini supporters, German American and
Italian  American  communities  were  largely  left  in
peace  during  the  war.  The  relocation  and  temporary
imprisonment  of  Japanese  immigrants  and  Japanese
American citizens was a glaring exception to this oth-
erwise tolerant policy. Immediately after the attack on
Pearl Harbor, the West Coast remained calm. Then, as
residents  began  to  fear  spies,  sabotage,  and  further
attacks,  California’s  long  history  of  racial  animosity
toward  Asian  immigrants  surfaced.  Local  politicians
and newspapers whipped up hysteria against Japanese
Americans, who numbered only about 112,000, had no
political power, and lived primarily in small enclaves in
the Pacific coast states.

MAP 24.1
Japanese Relocation Camps

In 1942, the government ordered
112,000 Japanese Americans living on
the West Coast into internment camps
in the nation’s interior because of
their supposed threat to public safety.
Some of the camps were as far away
as Arkansas. The federal government
rescinded the mass evacuation order in
December 1944, but 44,000 people still
remained in the camps when the war
ended in August 1945.

ALASKA

HAWAII

CHAPTER 24

  The World at War, 1937–1945

787

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Why were Japanese Ameri-
cans treated differently
than German and Italian
Americans during the war?

Early

in  1942,  President
Roosevelt  responded
to  anti-
Japanese  fears  by  issuing  Exec u-
tive  Order  9066,  which  autho-
rized  the  War  Department  to
force  Japanese  Americans  from
their West  Coast homes and hold them in relocation
camps for the rest of the war. Although there was no
disloyal or seditious activity among the evacuees, few
public leaders opposed the plan. “A Jap’s a Jap,” snapped
General John DeWitt, the officer charged with defense
of the West Coast. “It makes no difference whether he
is an American citizen or not.”

The  relocation plan  shocked  Japanese  Americans,
more than two-thirds of whom were Nisei; that is, their
parents  were  immigrants,  but  they  were  native-born
American citizens. Army officials gave families only a
few days to dispose of their property. Businesses that
had taken a lifetime to build were liquidated overnight.
The War Relocation Authority moved the prisoners to
hastily  built  camps  in  desolate  areas  in  California,
Arizona, Utah, Colorado, Wyoming, Idaho, and Arkan-
sas (Map 24.1). Ironically, the Japanese Americans who
made  up  one-third  of  the  population  of  Hawaii,  and
presumably  posed  a  greater  threat  because  of  their
numbers and proximity to Japan, were not imprisoned.
They provided much of the unskilled labor in the island
territory,  and  the  Hawaiian  economy  could  not  have
functioned without them.

Cracks soon appeared in the relocation policy. An
agricultural labor shortage led the government to fur-
lough  seasonal  farmworkers  from  the  camps  as  early
as 1942. About 4,300 students were allowed to attend
colleges  outside  the  West  Coast  military  zone.  Other

WASH.

ORE.

(cid:13)

Tule Lake

NEV.

(cid:13)
Manzanar

CALIF.

(cid:13)

MONT.

N. DAK.

MINN.

IDAHO
(cid:13)

Minidoka

Topaz

(cid:13)

UTAH

(cid:13)

Heart
Mountain

S. DAK.

WIS.

WYO.

COLO.
Granada
(Amache)

(cid:13)

IOWA

NEBR.

ILL.

KANSAS

MO.

ARIZ.
Poston
(cid:13)

Gila River

N. MEX.

OKLA.

ARK.
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

Rohwer

Jerome
LA. MISS.

(cid:13)

Japanese relocation camps
States and territories with more
than 1,000 Japanese residents
Military exclusion zone

TEXAS

