788

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Behind Barbed Wire

As part of the forced relocation of 112,000 Japanese
Americans, Los Angeles photographer Toyo Miyatake
and his family were sent to Manzanar, a camp in the
California desert east of the Sierra Nevada. Miyatake
secretly began shooting photographs of the camp
with a handmade camera. Eventually, Miyatake
received permission from the authorities to docu-
ment life in the camp — its births, weddings, deaths,
and high school graduations. To communicate the
injustice of internment, he also took staged photo-
graphs, such as this image of three young boys
behind barbed wire with a watchtower in the dis-
tance. For Miyatake, the image gave new meaning
to the phrase “prisoners of war.” Toyo Miyatake.

internees  were  permitted  to  join  the  armed  services.
The  442nd  Regimental  Combat  Team,  a  unit  com-
posed almost entirely of Nisei volunteers, served with
distinction in Europe.

Gordon  Hirabayashi  was  among  the  Nisei  who
actively resisted incarceration. A student at the Univer-
sity of Washington, Hirabayashi was a religious pacifist
who had registered with his draft board as a conscien-
tious objector. He refused to report for evacuation and
turned himself in to the FBI. “I wanted to uphold the
principles of the Constitution,” Hirabayashi later stated,
“and the curfew and evacuation orders which singled
out  a  group  on  the  basis  of  ethnicity  violated  them.”
Tried and convicted in 1942, he appealed his case to the
Supreme Court in Hirabayashi v. United States (1943).
In that case and in Korematsu v. United States (1944),
the Court allowed the removal of Japanese Americans
from  the  West  Coast on  the  basis  of  “military  neces-
sity” but avoided ruling on the constitutionality of the
incarceration  program.  The  Court’s  decision  under-
scored  the  fragility  of  civil  liberties  in  wartime.
Congress issued a public apology in 1988 and awarded
$20,000  to  each  of  the  eighty  thousand  surviving
Japanese Americans who had once been internees.

Fighting and Winning the War
World War II was a war for control of the world. Had
the  Axis  powers  triumphed,  Germany  would  have
dominated, either directly or indirectly, all of Europe

and much of Africa and the Middle East; Japan would
have  controlled  most  of  East  and  Southeast  Asia.  To
prevent  this  outcome,  which  would  have  crippled
democracy in Europe and restricted American power
to the Western Hemisphere, the Roosevelt administra-
tion took the United States to war. The combination of
American  intervention,  the  perseverance  of  Britain,
and the profound civilian and military sacrifices of the
Soviet Union decided the outcome of the conflict and
shaped the character of the postwar world.

Wartime Aims and Tensions
Great Britain, the United States, and the Soviet Union
were  the  key  actors  in  the  Allied  coalition.  China,
France,  and  other  nations  played  crucial  but  smaller
roles.  The  leaders  who  became  known  as  the  Big
Three — President Franklin Roosevelt, Prime Minister
Winston  Churchill  of  Great  Britain,  and  Premier
Joseph Stalin of the Soviet Union — set military strat-
egy.  However,  Stalin  was  not  a  party  to  the  Atlantic
Charter, which Churchill and Roosevelt had signed in
August 1941, and disagreed fundamentally with some
of  its  precepts,  such  as  a  capitalist-run  international
trading  system.  The  Allies  also  disagreed  about  mili-
tary strategy and timing. The Big Three made defeating
Germany (rather than Japan) the top military priority,
but  they  differed  over  how  best  to  do  it.  In  1941,  a
massive German force had invaded the Soviet Union
and  reached  the  outskirts  of  Leningrad,  Moscow,
and  Stalingrad  before  being  halted  in  early  1942  by

