CHAPTER 24

  The World at War, 1937–1945

789

hard-pressed Russian troops. To relieve pressure on the
Soviet army, Stalin wanted the British and Americans
to  open  a  second  front  with  a  major  invasion  of
Germany through France.

Roosevelt informally assured Stalin that the Allies
would comply in 1942, but Churchill opposed an early
invasion,  and  American  war  production  was  not  yet
sufficient  to  support  it.  For  eighteen  months,  Stalin’s
pleas went unanswered, and the Soviet Union bore the
brunt of the fighting; in the 1943 Battle of Kursk alone,
the  Soviet  army  suffered  860,000  casualties,  several
times  what  the  Allies  would  suffer  for  the  first  two
months of the European campaign after D-Day. Then,
at  a  conference  of  the  Big  Three  in  Tehran,  Iran,  in
November  1943,  Churchill  and  Roosevelt  agreed  to
open  a  second  front  in  France  within  six  months  in
return  for  Stalin’s  promise  to  join  the  fight  against
Japan.  Both  sides  adhered  to  this  agreement,  but  the
long  delay  angered  Stalin,  who  became  increasingly
suspicious of American and British intentions.

The War in Europe
Throughout  1942,  the  Allies  suffered  one  defeat  after
another. German armies pushed deep into Soviet terri-
tory, advancing through the wheat farms of the Ukraine
and the rich oil region of the Caucasus. Simultaneously,
German  forces  began  an  offensive  in  North  Africa
aimed  at  seizing  the  Suez  Canal.  In  the  Atlantic,
U-boats  devastated  American
convoys  carrying  oil  and  other
vital  supplies  to  Britain  and  the
Soviet Union.

Over the winter of 1942–1943,
however, the tide began to turn in
favor  of  the  Allies.  In  the  epic
Battle of Stalingrad, Soviet forces not only halted the
German advance but also allowed the Russian army to
push  westward  (Map  24.2).  By  early  1944,  Stalin’s
troops had driven the German army out of the Soviet
Union. Meanwhile, as Churchill’s temporary substitute

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
How did the Allies dis-
agree over military
strategy?

Hitting the Beach at Normandy

These U.S. soldiers were among the 156,000 Allied troops who stormed the beaches of Normandy on D-Day,
June 6, 1944: on that day alone, more than 10,000 were killed or wounded. Within a month, 1 million Allied
troops had come ashore. Most Americans learned of the invasion at 3:30 A.M. Eastern Time, when Edward R.
Murrow, the well-known radio journalist whose reports from war-torn London had gripped the nation in 1940,
read General Eisenhower’s statement to the troops. “The eyes of the world are upon you,” Eisenhower told
the men as they prepared to invade the European mainland. Library of Congress.

