790

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

0

0

200

400 miles

200

400 kilometers

NORWAY

SWEDEN

FINLAND

ESTONIA

LATVIA

a
Se

Baltic

LITHUANIA

Danzig

(cid:2)

East
Prussia

Warsaw

(cid:2)
POLAND

Leningrad

(cid:2)

S O V I E T
U N I O N

Moscow

(cid:2)

Kursk
July 5–23,
1943

1943

(cid:8)

1943

1943

(cid:2)
Kiev

1943

Stalingrad
Aug. 21, 1942–
Jan. 31, 1943

(cid:8)

ROMANIA

BULGARIA

GREECE

Rhodes

Crete

Black Sea

TURKEY

IRAN

SYRIA

IRAQ

Cyprus

LEBANON

IRELAND

N

E

W

S

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

North
Sea

DENMARK

UNITED
KINGDOM

1942–1943

London

(cid:2)

NETH.

Berlin

(cid:2)

BELG.

GERMANY

(cid:2)

Paris

LUX.

FRANCE

(cid:2)

Vichy

(cid:2)

Prague

Vienna

CZECH.
(cid:2)

SWITZ.

AUSTRIA

HUNGARY

SPAIN

Corsica

Rome

(cid:2)

YUGOSLAVIA

ITALY

AdriaticSea

Salerno
Sept. 10,
1943

(cid:8)

Sardinia

ALBANIA

L
A
G
U
T
R
O
P

1942

1942

SP. MOROCCO

(cid:2)

Casablanca
MOROCCO

(cid:2)

Algiers

1942–1943

(cid:8)

Tunis

(cid:2)

Sicily

Kassarine Pass
Feb.14–22, 1943

TUNISIA
(cid:8)

ALGERIA

Mareth
Mar. 20–26, 1943

Tripoli

(cid:2)

Axis powers

Axis occupied areas

Allied advances

Allied air operations

Allied powers and possessions

(cid:8)

Major battle

LIBYA

Neutral nations

M e d i t e r r a n e a n   S e a

PALESTINE
El Alamein
Oct. 23–Nov. 5,
Alexandria
1942
(cid:2)

(cid:2)
Tobruk

(cid:8)

EGYPT

TRANS-
JORDAN

SAUDI
ARABIA

Red Sea

MAP 24.2
World War II in Europe, 1941–1943

Hitler’s Germany reached its greatest extent in 1942, by which time Nazi forces had occupied
Norway, France, North Africa, central Europe, and much of western Russia. The tide of battle turned
in late 1942 when the German advance stalled at Leningrad and Stalingrad. By early 1943, the
Soviet army had launched a massive counterattack at Stalingrad, and Allied forces had driven the
Germans from North Africa and launched an invasion of Sicily and the Italian mainland.

for  a  second  front  in  France,  the  Allies  launched  a
major  counteroffensive  in  North  Africa.  Between
November 1942 and May 1943, Allied troops under the
leadership  of  General  Dwight  D.  Eisenhower  and
General George S. Patton defeated the German Afrika
Korps, led by General Erwin Rommel.

From  Africa,  the  Allied  command  followed
Churchill’s  strategy  of  attacking  the  Axis  through  its
“soft  underbelly”:  Sicily  and  the  Italian  peninsula.
Faced with an Allied invasion, the Italian king ousted
Mussolini’s  fascist  regime  in  July  1943.  But  German
troops, who far outmatched the Allies in skill and orga-
nization, took control of Italy and strenuously resisted

the Allied invasion. American and British divisions took
Rome only in June 1944 and were still fighting German
forces in northern Italy when the European war ended
in May 1945 (Map 24.3). Churchill’s southern strategy
proved a time-consuming and costly mistake.

D-Day  The long-promised invasion of France came
on  D-Day,  June  6,  1944.  That  morning,  the  largest
armada  ever  assembled  moved  across  the  English
Channel under the command of General Eisenhower.
When American, British, and Canadian soldiers hit the
beaches of Normandy, they suffered terrible casualties
but secured a beachhead. Over the next few days, more

