CHAPTER 24

  The World at War, 1937–1945

791

0

0

200

400 miles

200

400 kilometers

FINLAND

1944

NORWAY

SWEDEN

ESTONIA

Leningrad

UNITED
KINGDOM

North
Sea

1944–1945
NETH.

London

BELG.

IRELAND

N

W

E

S

Normandy Invasion
June 6, 1944

(cid:8)

1944
Paris

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

FRANCE

Battle of the Bulge
Dec. 1944–Jan. 1945

DENMARK

Danzig

Berlin falls
May 2,1945
(cid:8)

GERMANY

Prague

Remagen
Mar. 1945
1945
1945

(cid:8)

(cid:8)

LUX.

1945

LATVIA

1944

LITHUANIA

East
Prussia

1944

1945

1945
CZECH.

Vienna

Warsaw
POLAND

Kiev

1944

SWITZ.

AUSTRIA

1945

HUNGARY

ROMANIA

1944

4
4
9
1

ITALY
1
9
4

4–45

1944

YUGOSLAVIA

Rome liberated
June 4, 1944

BULGARIA

Moscow

SOVIET UNION

Stalingrad

Black Sea

TURKEY

L
A
G
U
T
R
O
P

SPAIN

Algiers

ALGERIA

SP. MOROCCO

MOROCCO

Axis powers

Axis occupied areas

Rome

(cid:8)

(cid:8)

ALB.
Monte Cassino
Jan. 27–May 18, 1944

4
4
9
1

Tunis

Anzio
Jan. 22, 1944

GREECE

SYRIA

LEB.

IRAQ

TUNISIA

M e d i t e r r a n e a n   S e a

PALESTINE

Allied advances

Allied air operations

TRANS-
JORDAN

SAUDI
ARABIA

Allied powers and possessions

(cid:8)

Major battle

Neutral nations

LIBYA

EGYPT

MAP 24.3
World War II in Europe, 1944–1945

By the end of 1943, the Russian army had nearly pushed the Germans out of the Soviet Union, and
by June 1944, when the British and Americans ﬁnally invaded France, the Russians had liberated
eastern Poland and most of southeastern Europe. By the end of 1944, British and American forces
were ready to invade Germany from the west, and the Russians were poised to do the same from
the east. Germany surrendered on May 7, 1945.

than  1.5  million  soldiers  and  thousands  of  tons  of
military  supplies  and  equipment  flowed  into  France.
Much to the Allies’ advantage, they never faced more
than one-third of Hitler’s Wehrmacht (armed forces),
because  the  Soviet  Union  continued  to  hold  down
the  Germans  on  the  eastern  front.  In  August,  Allied
troops liberated Paris; by September, they had driven
the  Germans  out  of  most  of  France  and  Belgium.
Meanwhile, long-range Allied bombers attacked Ger-
man  cities  such  as  Hamburg  and  Dresden  as  well
as  military  and  industrial  targets.  The  air  campaign
killed some 305,000 civilians and soldiers and injured
another  780,000 — a  grisly  reminder  of  the  war’s
human brutality.

The Germans were not yet ready to give up, how-
ever. In December 1944, they mounted a final offensive
in  Belgium,  the  so-called  Battle  of  the  Bulge,  before
being  pushed  back  across  the  Rhine  River  into
Germany. American and British troops drove toward
Berlin from the west, while Soviet troops advanced east
through Poland. On April 30, 1945, as Russian troops
massed  outside  Berlin,  Hitler  committed  suicide;  on
May 7, Germany formally surrendered.

The  Holocaust  When  Allied  troops  advanced  into
Poland and Germany in the spring of 1945, they came
face-to-face with Hitler’s “final solution” for the Jewish
population  of  Germany  and  the  German-occupied

