792

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

countries: the extermination camps in which 6 million
Jews had been put to death, along with another 6 mil-
lion  Poles,  Slavs,  Gypsies,  homosexuals,  and  other
“undesirables.” Photographs of the Nazi death camps at
Buchenwald,  Dachau,  and  Auschwitz  showed  bodies
stacked like cordwood and survivors so emaciated that
they were barely alive. Published in Life and other mass-
circulation  magazines,  the  photographs  of  the  Holo-
caust horrified the American public and the world.

The Nazi persecution of German Jews in the 1930s
was widely known in the United States. But when Jews
had  begun  to  flee  Europe,  the  United  States  refused
to  relax  its  strict  immigration  laws  to  take  them  in.
In 1939, when the SS St. Louis, a German ocean liner
carrying  nearly  a  thousand  Jewish  refugees,  sought
permission  from  President  Roosevelt  to  dock  at  an
American  port,  FDR  had  refused.  Its  passengers’
futures uncertain, the St. Louis was forced to return to
Europe,  where  many  would  later  be  deported  to
Auschwitz and other extermination camps. American
officials, along with those of most other nations, con-
tinued this exclusionist policy during World War II as
the Nazi regime extended its control over millions of
Eastern European Jews.

Various factors inhibited American action, but the
most important was widespread anti-Semitism: in the
State Department, Christian churches, and the public
at large. The legacy of the immigration restriction leg-
islation of the 1920s and the isolationist attitudes of the
1930s  also  discouraged  policymakers  from  assuming
responsibility for the fate of the refugees. Taking a nar-
row view of the national interest, the State Department
allowed only 21,000 Jewish refugees to enter the United
States  during  the  war.  But  the  War  Refugee  Board,
which  President  Roosevelt  established  in  1944  at  the
behest of Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau,
helped move 200,000 European Jews to safe havens in
other countries.

The War in the Pacific
Winning the war against Japan was every bit as ardu-
ous  as  waging  the  campaign  against  Germany.  After
crippling the American battle fleet at Pearl Harbor, the
Japanese quickly expanded into the South Pacific, with
seaborne  invasions  of  Hong  Kong,  Wake  Island,  and
Guam.  Japanese  forces  then  advanced  into  Southeast
Asia,  conquering  the  Solomon  Islands,  Burma,  and
Malaya  and  threatening  Australia  and  India.  By  May
1942,  they  had  forced  the  surrender  of  U.S.  forces  in
the Philippine Islands and, in the Bataan “death march,”
caused the deaths of 10,000 American prisoners of war.

At that dire moment, American naval forces scored
two crucial victories. These were possible because the
attack on Pearl Harbor had destroyed several American
battleships but left all aircraft carriers unscathed. In the
Battle  of  the  Coral  Sea,  off  southern  New  Guinea  in
May  1942,  they  halted  the  Japanese  offensive  against
Australia. Then, in June, at the Battle of Midway Island,
the  American  navy  severely  damaged  the  Japanese
fleet. In both battles, planes launched from American
aircraft  carriers  provided  the  margin  of  victory.  The
U.S.  military  command,  led  by  General  Douglas
MacArthur and Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, now took
the  offensive  in  the  Pacific  (Map  24.4).  For  the  next
eighteen  months,  American  forces  advanced  slowly
toward  Japan,  taking  one  island  after  another  in  the
face  of  determined  Japanese  resistance.  In  October
1944, MacArthur and Nimitz began the reconquest of
the Philippines by winning the Battle of Leyte Gulf, a
massive  naval  encounter  in  which  the  Japanese  lost
practically their entire fleet (Map 24.5).

By  early  1945,  victory  over  Japan  was  in  sight.
Japanese  military  forces  had  suffered  devastating
losses, and American bombing of the Japanese home-
land  had  killed  330,000  civilians  and  crippled  the
nation’s economy. The bloodletting on both sides was
horrendous.  On  the  small  islands  of  Iwo  Jima  and
Okinawa, tens of thousands of Japanese soldiers fought
to the death, killing 13,000 U.S. Marines and wounding
46,000 more. Desperate to halt the American advance
and short on ammunition, Japanese pilots flew suicidal
kamikaze missions, crashing their bomb-laden planes
into American ships.

Among the grim realities of war in the Pacific was
the  conflict’s  racial  overtones.  The  attack  on  Pearl
Harbor  reawakened  the  long  tradition  of  anti-Asian
sentiment  in  the  United  States.  In  the  eyes  of  many
Americans,  the  Japanese  were  “yellow  monkeys,”  an
inferior  race  whose  humanity  deserved  minimal
respect.  Racism  was  evident  among  the  Japanese  as
well. Their brutal attacks on China (including the rape
of Nanjing), their forcing of Korean “comfort women”
to have sex with Japanese soldiers, and their treatment
of American prisoners in the Philippines flowed from
their  own  sense  of  racial  superiority.  Anti-Japanese
attitudes  in  the  United  States  would  subside  in  the
1950s  as  the  island  nation  became  a  trusted  ally.  But
racism would again play a major role in the U.S. war in
Vietnam in the 1960s.

As  the  American  navy  advanced  on  Japan  in  the
late winter of 1945, President Roosevelt returned to the
United States from the Yalta Conference, a major meet-
ing of the Big Three at Yalta, a resort town on the Black

