CHAPTER 24

  The World at War, 1937–1945

793

SOVIET UNION

MONGOLIA

MANCHURIA

Beijing

(cid:2)

KOREA

JAPAN
(cid:2)
Tokyo

CHINA

INDIA

BURMA

Taiwan

(cid:2)
Hong Kong

THAILAND
(cid:2)

FRENCH
INDOCHINA

Bangkok

MALAYA

Sumatra

(cid:8)

Borneo

Singapore falls
Feb. 15, 1942

Java

IN DIAN
O C E AN

P A C I F I C   O C E A N

MARIANA IS.

Wake I.

Guam

MARSHALL IS.

CAROLINE IS.

Bataan
Jan.–Apr. 1942

(cid:8)
(cid:2)

Manila

PHILIPPINE
IS.

NEW GUINEA

GILBERT IS.

SOLOMONIS.

(cid:8)

(cid:8)
Coral Sea
May 7–8, 1942

1942

Guadalcanal
Aug. 7, 1942–
Feb. 7, 1943

AUSTRALIA

Coral Sea

ALASKA

W

N

S

E

Midway
June 3–6, 1942

(cid:8)

HAWAII
(cid:8)

Pearl Harbor
Dec. 7, 1941

Area under
Japanese control, 1942
Allied powers
Neutral nations
Allied response
Major battle

500

1,000 miles

500

1,000 kilometers

(cid:8)

0

0

MAP 24.4
World War II in the Pacific, 1941–1942

After the attacks on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, the Japanese rapidly extended their
domination in the Paciﬁc. The Japanese ﬂag soon ﬂew as far east as the Marshall and Gilbert
islands and as far south as the Solomon Islands and parts of New Guinea. Japan also controlled
the Philippines, much of Southeast Asia, and parts of China, including Hong Kong. By mid-1942,
American naval victories at the Coral Sea and Midway stopped further Japanese expansion.

Sea  (Chapter  25).  The  sixty-three-year-old  president
was  a  sick  man,  visibly  exhausted  by  his  14,000-mile
trip  and  suffering  from  heart  failure  and  high  blood
pressure. On April 12, 1945, during a short visit to his
vacation  home  in  Warm  Springs,  Georgia,  Roosevelt
suffered a cerebral hemorrhage and died.

The Atomic Bomb and the End
of the War
When  Harry  Truman  assumed  the  presidency,  he
learned  for  the  first  time  about  the  top-secret  Man-
hattan Project, which was on the verge of testing a new
weapon: the atomic bomb. Working at the University
of Chicago in December 1942, Enrico Fermi and Leo

Szilard, refugees from fascist Italy and Nazi Germany,
produced  the  first  controlled  atomic  chain  reaction
using  highly  processed  uranium.  With  the  aid  of
German-born refugee Albert Einstein, the greatest the-
orist  of  modern  physics  and  a  scholar  at  Princeton,
they  persuaded  Franklin  Roosevelt  to  develop  an
atomic weapon, warning that German scientists were
also working on such nuclear reactions.

The  Manhattan  Project  cost  $2  billion,  employed
120,000  people,  and  involved  the  construction  of
thirty-seven installations in nineteen states — with all
of  its  activity  hidden  from  Congress,  the  American
people,  and  even  Vice  President  Truman.  Directed
by  General  Leslie  Graves  and  scientist  J.  Robert
Oppenheimer, the nation’s top physicists assembled the

