794

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

SOVIET UNION

1
9
4
5

1943

MONGOLIA

MANCHURIA
1945
1945

P A C I F I C   O C E A N

CHINA

INDIA

1943–44

BURMA

THAILAND
(cid:2)
Bangkok

Beijing

(cid:2)

KOREA

JAPAN

Tokyo

(cid:2)

Hiroshima Aug. 6, 1945

Nagasaki Aug. 9, 1945

Okinawa
Apr. 1–June 22, 1945

(cid:8)

(cid:8)

Iwo Jima
Feb. 19–Mar. 16, 1945

(cid:2)
Hong Kong

Taiwan

PHILIPPINE
IS.

FRENCH
INDOCHINA

1945

1945

MARIANA IS.

Guam

1944

Wake I.

1944

Philippine Sea
June 19–20, 1944
(cid:8)

Leyte Gulf
Oct. 20–26, 1944

(cid:8)

1944

1944

NEW
GUINEA

1943

CAROLINE IS.

MARSHALL IS.

Tarawa
Nov. 20, 1943

GILBERT IS.

(cid:8)

SOLOMON IS.

1943

1943

Borneo

Java

MALAYA

Singapore(cid:2)

Sumatra

INDIAN
O C E AN

AUSTRALIA

Coral Sea

ALASKA

W

N

S

E

Midway I.

HAWAII

Area under
Japanese control, 1942
Allied powers
Neutral nations
Allied response
Major battle
Atomic bomb

500

1,000 miles

500

1,000 kilometers

(cid:8)

0

0

MAP 24.5
World War II in the Pacific, 1943–1945

Allied forces retook the islands of the central Paciﬁc in 1943 and 1944 and ousted the Japanese
from the Philippines early in 1945. Carrier-launched planes had started bombing Japan itself in
1942, but the capture of these islands gave U.S. bombers more bases from which to strike Japanese
targets. As the Soviet army invaded Japanese-occupied Manchuria in August 1945, U.S. planes took
off from one of the newly captured Mariana Islands to drop the atomic bombs on Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. The Japanese offered to surrender on August 10.

first bomb in Los Alamos, New Mexico, and success-
fully  tested  it  on  July  16,  1945.  Overwhelmed  by  its
frightening power, as he witnessed the first mushroom
cloud,  Oppenheimer  recalled  the  words  from  the
Bhagavad Gita, one of the great texts of Hindu scrip-
ture: “I am become Death, the Destroyer of Worlds.”

Three  weeks  later,  President  Truman  ordered  the
dropping  of  atomic  bombs  on  two  Japanese  cities:
Hiroshima on August 6 and Naga-
saki on August 9. Truman’s ratio-
nale  for  this  order — and  the
implications  of  his  decision —
have  long  been  the  subject  of
scholarly and popular debate. The

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors inﬂuenced
Truman’s decision to use
atomic weapons against
Japan?

principal reason was straightforward: Truman and his
American advisors, including Secretary of War Henry
Stimson  and  Army  Chief  of  Staff  General  George
Marshall, believed that Japan’s military leaders would
never  surrender  unless  their  country  faced  national
ruin.  Moreover,  at  the  Potsdam  Conference  on  the
outskirts of Berlin in July 1945, the Allies had agreed
that only the “unconditional surrender” of Japan was
acceptable — the  same  terms  under  which  Germany
and Italy had been defeated. To win such a surrender,
an invasion of Japan itself seemed necessary. Stimson
and Marshall told Truman that such an invasion would
produce  between  half  a  million  and  a  million  Allied
casualties.

