CHAPTER 24

  The World at War, 1937–1945

795

The Big Three at Yalta

With victory in Europe at hand, Roosevelt journeyed in February 1945 to Yalta, on the Black Sea, and met
for what would be the ﬁnal time with Churchill and Stalin. The leaders discussed the important and contro-
versial issues of the treatment of Germany, the status of Poland, the creation of the United Nations, and
Russian entry into the war against Japan. The Yalta agreements mirrored a new balance of power and set
the stage for the Cold War. Franklin D. Roosevelt Library.

Before giving the order to drop the atomic bomb,
Truman  considered  other  options.  His  military  advi-
sors rejected the most obvious alternative: a nonlethal
demonstration of the bomb’s awesome power, perhaps
on  a  remote  Pacific  island.  If  the  demonstration
failed — not out of the question, as the bomb had been
tested only once — it would embolden Japan further. A
detailed advance warning designed to scare Japan into
surrender  was  also  rejected.  Given  Japan’s  tenacious
fighting  in  the  Pacific,  the  Americans  believed  that
only  massive  devastation  or  a  successful  invasion
would  lead  Japan’s  military  leadership  to  surrender.
After  all,  the  deaths  of  more  than  100,000  Japanese
civilians  in  the  U.S.  firebombing  of  Tokyo  and  other
cities in the spring of 1945 had brought Japan no closer
to surrender.

In any event, the atomic bombs achieved the imme-
diate goal. The deaths of 100,000 people at Hiroshima

and 60,000 at Nagasaki prompted the Japanese govern-
ment to surrender unconditionally on August 10 and
to  sign  a  formal  agreement  on  September  2,  1945.
Fascism had been defeated, thanks to a fragile alliance
between the capitalist nations of the West and the com-
munist government of the Soviet Union. The coming
of peace would strain and then destroy the victorious
coalition. Even as the global war came to an end, the
early signs of the coming Cold War were apparent, as
were  the  stirrings  of  independence  in  the  European
colonies.

The Toll of the War
After  the  battle  of  Iwo  Jima,  one  of  the  fiercest  and
bloodiest  of  the  Pacific  war,  a  rabbi  chaplain  in  the
Marine Corps delivered the eulogy for the fallen. “This
shall not be in vain,” he said, surveying a battlefield that

