796

PART 7

  DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Hiroshima, March 1946

Though the atomic bomb had
been dropped on the port city
of Hiroshima six months previ-
ous to this photo being taken,
the devastation is still apparent.
The U.S. Army report on the
bombing described the immedi-
ate effects of the blast: “At 8:15
A.M., the bomb exploded with a
blinding ﬂash in the sky, and
a great rush of air and a loud
rumble of noise extended for
many miles around the city; the
ﬁrst blast was soon followed by
the sounds of falling buildings
and of growing ﬁres, and a
great cloud of dust and smoke
began to cast a pall of darkness
over the city.” The only build-
ings not leveled were those
with concrete reinforcement,
meant to withstand earth-
quakes. The human toll of this
weapon was unprecedented:
of the estimated population of
350,000, 100,000 were likely
killed by the explosion, and
many tens of thousands more
died slowly of the effects of
radiation poisoning. U.S. Air
Force.

witnessed  the  deaths  of  nearly  30,000  American  and
Japanese  soldiers.  Speaking  of  American  losses,  he
said,  “from  the  suffering  and  sorrow  of  those  who
mourn  this,  will  come — we  promise — the  birth  of  a
new freedom for the sons of man everywhere.” The toll
of “suffering and sorrow” from World War II was enor-
mous. Worldwide, more than 50 million soldiers and
civilians  were  killed,  nearly  2.5  percent  of  the  globe’s
population. The Holocaust took the lives of 6 million
European Jews, 2.6 million from Poland alone. Nearly
100  million  additional  soldiers  and  civilians  were
wounded, and 30 million people across the globe were
rendered homeless. It was one of the most wrenching,
disruptive, and terrible wars in human history.

Alongside  the  human  toll  stood  profound  eco-
nomic and political transformations. Hundreds of cit-
ies  in  Europe  and  Asia  had  been  bombed.  Some  of
them, like Dresden, Warsaw, Hamburg, and Hiroshima,
had  been  simply  obliterated.  Much  of  the  industrial
infrastructure of Germany and Japan, two of the world’s
most  important  industrial  economies  before  the  war,
lay in ruins. Moreover, despite emerging as one of the

victors, Britain was no longer a global power. The inde-
pendence movement in India was only the most obvi-
ous  sign  of  its  waning  influence.  Indeed,  throughout
the  colonized  world  in  Asia  and  Africa,  people  had
taken  the  Atlantic  Charter,  and  FDR’s  insistence  that
this  was  a  war  for  democracy,  seriously.  For  them,
resumption  of  European  imperialism  was  unaccept-
able,  and  the  war  represented  a  step  toward  national
self-determination.

In the United States, too, the toll of war was great.
More than 400,000 lives were lost, and nearly 300,000
American  soldiers  were  wounded.  Yet  millions
returned  home,  and  in  the  coming  decades  veterans
would play a central role in national life. Incredibly, in
1950 World War II veterans made up one-third of all
American men over the age of nineteen. Only the Civil
War  involved  a  comparable  commitment  of  military
service from a generation. Americans paid dearly for
that  commitment — though  not,  it  must  be  noted,  as
dearly as other peoples in Europe and Asia — and the
legacies  of  the  war  shaped  families,  politics,  and  for-
eign policy for the remainder of the century.

