CHAPTER 24

  CHAPTER REVIEW

797

SUMMARY
The rise of fascism in Germany, Italy, and Japan led to
the outbreak of World War II. Initially, the American
public opposed U.S. intervention. But by 1940, Presi-
dent Roosevelt was mobilizing support for the military
and preparing the country for war. The Japanese attack
on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 brought the nation
fully  into  the  conflict.  War  mobilization  dramatically
expanded the federal government and led to substan-
tial economic growth. It also boosted geographical and
social mobility as women, rural whites, and southern
blacks found employment in new defense plants across
the country. Government rules assisted both the labor
movement  and  the  African  American  campaign  for
civil  rights.  However,  religious  and  racial  animosity
caused the exclusion of Jewish refugees and the intern-
ment of 112,000 Japanese Americans.

By 1942, Germany and Japan seemed to be winning
the war. But in 1943, the Allies took the offensive — with

advances  by  the  Soviet  army  in  Europe  and  the
American navy in the Pacific — and by the end of 1944,
Allied victory was all but certain. Germany finally sur-
rendered  in  May  1945,  and  Japan  surrendered  in
August, after the atomic bombing of the Japanese cities
Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki. The  United  States  emerged
from the war with an undamaged homeland, sole pos-
session  of  the  atomic  bomb,  and  a  set  of  unresolved
diplomatic disputes with the Soviet Union that would
soon  lead  to  the  four-decade-long  Cold  War.  Federal
laws  and  practices  established  during  the  war — the
universal  income  tax,  a  huge  military  establishment,
and multibillion-dollar budgets, to name but a few —
became  part  of  American  life.  So,  too,  did  the  active
participation  of  the  United  States  in  international
politics  and  alliances,  an  engagement  intensified  by
the  unresolved  issues  of  the  wartime  alliance  with
the  Soviet  Union  and  the  postwar  fate  of  colonized
nations.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

fascism (p. 768)
National Socialist (Nazi) Party

(p. 768)

Rome-Berlin Axis (p. 769)
Neutrality Act of 1935 (p. 769)
Popular Front (p. 770)
Munich Conference (p. 770)
Committee to Defend America
By Aiding the Allies (p. 771)
America First Committee (p. 771)
Four Freedoms (p. 771)
Lend-Lease Act (p. 771)
Atlantic Charter (p. 772)

Pearl Harbor (p. 773)
War Powers Act (p. 773)
Revenue Act (p. 775)
code talkers (p. 776)
Executive Order 8802 (p. 780)
Servicemen’s Readjustment Act

(1944) (p. 781)
zoot suits (p. 783)
Executive Order 9066 (p. 787)
D-Day (p. 790)
Holocaust (p. 792)
Manhattan Project (p. 793)

Key People

Benito Mussolini (p. 768)
Adolf Hitler (p. 768)
Hideki Tojo (p. 773)
Charles A. Lindbergh (p. 769)
Winston Churchill (p. 772)
Harry S. Truman (p. 781)
Gordon Hirabayashi (p. 788)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (p. 790)

