798

PART 7

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  World War II has popularly been called the “good
war.” Do you agree with this assessment? Why do
you think it earned that nickname?

3.  How  did  World  War  II  affect  the  federal  govern-
ment’s  regulating  of  the  economy  and  its  taxing
power?

2.  Overall,  what  effects — positive  or  negative — did
World War II have on social change in the United
States,  particularly  among  women  and  minority
groups?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events listed under “America in the World” on the
thematic  timeline  on  page  671.  How  did  World
War II change the relationship between the United
States and the rest of the world in the first half of
the twentieth century?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  For  the  United
States,  the  period  between  World  War  I  (1914–
1918)  and  World  War  II  (1937–1945)  was  a  pro-
longed series of conflicts and crises, both domesti-
cally and internationally. What connections can be
drawn between World War I, the Great Depression,
and World War II? Did this “long” conflict draw the
United States and Europe closer together or drive
them  further  apart?  How  did  American  attitudes
toward  involvement  in  European  affairs  change
over this period?

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  Compare the photographs
of soldiers and those contributing to the war effort.
How do these images help us understand a major
event  like  World  War  II  from  different  perspec-
tives?  How  would  their  proximity  to  battle  affect
people’s experience of war?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Ronald A. Goldberg, America in the Forties (2012). An
engaging account of the home front during World
War II.

David Kennedy, Freedom from Fear: The American
People in Depression and War, 1929–1945 (1999). A
fascinating exploration of both the domestic and
military experience of World War II.

Elizabeth Mullener, War Stories: Remembering World
War II (2002). Fifty-three personal stories of war.

Emily Yellin, Our Mothers’ War: American Women at
Home and at the Front During World War II (2004).
The war seen from the point of view of women.

For documents and images related to the war, see “A
People at War” and “Powers of Persuasion: Poster Art

from World War II” (archives.gov/exhibits/exhibits
-list.html); “Women Come to the Front: Journalists,
Photographers, and Broadcasters During World
War II” (lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/wcf/wcf0001.html);
“The Japanese American Legacy Project” (densho.org
/densho.asp); and “Ansel Adams’s Photographs of
Japanese-American Internment at Manzanar”
(memory.loc.gov/ammem/aamhtml).

“The Enola Gay Controversy: How Do We Remember
a War That We Won?” at lehigh.edu/~ineng/enola.
Lehigh University professor Edward J. Gallagher’s site
on the decision to drop the atomic bomb.

