8P A R T

C H A P T E R 25
Cold War America,
1945–1963

C H A P T E R 26
Triumph of the Middle
Class, 1945–1963

C H A P T E R 27
Walking into Freedom
Land: The Civil Rights
Movement, 1941–1973

C H A P T E R 28
Uncivil Wars:
Liberal Crisis and
Conservative Rebirth,
1961–1972

C H A P T E R 29
The Search for Order
in an Era of Limits,
1973–1980

800

The Modern State
and the Age of
Liberalism
1945–1980

Between  1945  and  1980,  the  United  States  became  the  world’s  leading

economic and military power. That development defines these decades as

a distinct period of American history. Internationally, a prolonged period

of tension and conflict known as the Cold War drew the United States

into an engagement in world affairs unprecedented in the nation’s history.

Domestically, three decades of sustained economic growth, whose bene-

fits  were  widely,  though  imperfectly,  distributed,  expanded  the  middle

class and brought into being a mass consumer society. These international

and domestic developments were intertwined with the predominance of

liberalism in American politics and public policy. One might think of an

“age of liberalism” in this era, encompassing the social-welfare liberalism

that was a legacy of the New Deal and the rights liberalism of the 1960s,

both of which fell under the larger umbrella of Cold War liberalism.

Global  leadership  abroad  and  economic  prosperity  at  home  were

conditioned  on  further  expansions  in  government  power.  How  that

power  was  used  proved  controversial.  Immediately  following  World

War II, a national security state emerged to investigate so-called subver-

sives  in  the  United  States  and,  through  the  clandestine  Central  Intelli-

gence Agency (CIA), to destabilize foreign governments abroad. Mean-

while,  American  troops  went  to  war  in  Korea  and  Vietnam.  At  home,

African Americans, women, the poor, and other social groups called for

greater equality in American life and sought new laws and government

initiatives to make that equality a reality. Here, in brief, are the three key

dimensions of this convulsive, turbulent era.

