Global Leadership and the Cold War

The Age of Liberalism

When the United States ofﬁcially joined the combat-
ants of World War II, it entered into an alliance with
England and the Soviet Union. That alliance proved
impossible to sustain after 1945, as the United States
and the Soviet Union became competitors to shape
postwar Europe, East Asia, and the developing world.
The resulting Cold War lasted four decades, during
which the United States extended its political and
military reach onto every continent. Under the presi-
dency of Harry S. Truman, American ofﬁcials developed
the policy of containment — a combination of eco-
nomic, diplomatic, and military actions to limit the
expansion of communism — that subsequent presi-
dents embraced and expanded.

Diplomatic and military intervention abroad was
a hallmark of the Cold War. Most American interven-
tions took place in developing countries, in recently
independent, decolonized nations, and in countries
where nationalist movements pressed for indepen-
dence. In the name of preventing the spread of
communism, the United States intervened directly
or indirectly in China, Iran, Guatemala, Cuba, Indo-
nesia, and the Dominican Republic, among many
other nations, and fought major wars in Korea and
Vietnam. This new global role for the United States
inspired support but also spurred detractors. The latter
eventually included the antiwar movement during the
war in Vietnam. Chapter 25 focuses on the Cold War,
and Vietnam is addressed in Chapter 28.

In response to the Great Depression, President Franklin
Roosevelt’s New Deal expanded federal responsibility
for the social welfare of ordinary citizens, sweeping
away much of the laissez-faire individualism of earlier
eras (see Chapter 23). Legislators from both parties
embraced liberal ideas about the role of government
and undertook such measures as the GI Bill, subsidies
for suburban home ownership, and investment in
infrastructure and education. Poverty, however,
affected nearly one-third of Americans in the 1960s,
and racial discrimination denied millions of nonwhites
full citizenship. Lack of opportunity became a driving
force in the civil rights movement and in the Great
Society under President Lyndon Johnson.

Inspired by African American civil rights, other social
movements sought equality based on gender, sexuality,
ethnicity, and other identities. If “New Deal liberalism”
had focused on social welfare, this “rights liberalism”
focused on protecting people from discrimination and
ensuring equal citizenship. These struggles resulted in
new laws, such as the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and
transformative Supreme Court decisions. Conservative
opponents, however, mobilized in the 1960s against
what they saw as the excesses of liberal activism. The
resulting conﬂict began to reshape politics in the 1970s
and laid the groundwork for a new conservative resur-
gence. These developments are discussed in Chapters
27 and 28.

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

801

