The Modern State
and the Age of
Liberalism
1945–1980

Thematic Understanding

This timeline arranges some of the important

events of this period into themes. Consider

the entries under “America in the World” and

“Politics and Power” across all four decades.

What connections were there between

international developments and domestic

politics in this era of the Cold War?  >

Mass Consumption and
the Middle Class

More than ever, the postwar American economy was
driven by mass consumption and the accompanying
process of suburbanization. Rising wages, increasing
access to higher education, and the availability of
suburban home ownership raised living standards and
allowed more Americans than ever to afford consumer
goods. Suburbanization transformed the nation’s cities,
and the Sunbelt led the nation in population growth.
But the new prosperity had mixed results. Cities
declined and new racial and ethnic ghettos formed.
Suburbanization and mass consumption raised con-
cerns that the nation’s rivers, streams, air, and open
land were being damaged, and an environmental
movement arose in response. And prosperity itself
proved short-lived. By the 1970s, deindustrialization
had eroded much of the nation’s once prosperous
industrial base.

A deﬁning characteristic of the postwar decades
was the growth of the American middle class. That
growth was predicated on numerous demographic
changes. Home ownership increased, as did college
enrollments. Women worked more outside the home
and spurred a new feminism. Children enjoyed more
purchasing power, and a “teen culture” arose on
television, in popular music, and in ﬁlm. The family
became politicized, too, and by the late 1970s, lib-
erals and conservatives were divided over how best
to address the nation’s family life. All these develop-
ments are discussed in Chapters 25 and 29.

802

