Cold War America
1945–1963

In the autumn of 1950, a little-known

IDENTIF Y THE BIG IDEA
In the first two decades of the Cold
War,  how  did  competition  on  the
international stage and a climate of
fear at home affect politics, society,
and culture in the United States?

California  congressman  running  for
the  Senate  named  Richard  M.  Nixon
stood before reporters in Los Angeles. His
opponent, Helen Gahagan Douglas, was a
Hollywood actress and a New Deal Demo-
crat.  Nixon  told  the  gathered  reporters
that Douglas had cast “Communist-leaning” votes and that she was “pink right down
to her underwear.” Gahagan’s voting record was not much different from Nixon’s. But
tarring  her  with  communism  made  her  seem  un-American,  and  Nixon  defeated  the
“pink lady” with nearly 60 percent of the vote.

A few months earlier, U.S. tanks, planes, and artillery supplies had arrived in French
Indochina. A French colony since the nineteenth century, Indochina (present-day Viet-
nam, Laos, and Cambodia) was home to an independence movement led by Ho Chi
Minh and supported by the Soviet Union and China. In the summer of 1950, President
Harry S. Truman authorized $15 million worth of military supplies to aid France, which
was ﬁghting Ho’s army to keep possession of its Indochinese empire. “Neither national
independence nor democratic evolution exists in any area dominated by Soviet imperial-
ism,” Secretary of State Dean Acheson warned ominously as he announced U.S. sup-
port for French imperialism.

Connecting  these  coincidental  historical  moments,  one  domestic  and  the  other
international, was a decades-old force in American life that gained renewed strength
after World War II: anticommunism. The events in Los Angeles and Vietnam, however
different  on  the  surface,  were  part  of  the  global  geopolitical  struggle  between  the
democratic United States and the communist, authoritarian Soviet Union known as the
Cold  War.  Beginning  in  Europe  as  World  War  II  ended  and  extending  to  Asia,  Latin
America, the Middle East, and Africa by the mid-1950s, the Cold War reshaped interna-
tional relations and dominated global politics for more than forty years.

In the United States, the Cold War fostered suspicion of “subversives” in govern-
ment,  education,  and  the  media.  The  arms  race  that  developed  between  the  two
superpowers prompted Congress to boost military expenditures. The resulting military-
industrial complex enhanced the power of the corporations that built planes, munitions,
and electronic devices. In politics, the Cold War stiﬂed liberal initiatives as the New Deal
coalition  tried  to  advance  its  domestic  agenda  in  the  shadow  of  anticommunism.  In
these  ways,  the  line  between  the  international  and  the  domestic  blurred — and  that
blurred line was another enduring legacy of the Cold War.

25

C H A P T E R

CONTAINMENT AND
A DIVIDED GLOBAL
ORDER

Origins of the Cold War

The Containment Strategy

Containment in Asia

COLD WAR LIBERALISM
Truman and the End of Reform

Red Scare: The Hunt for

Communists

The Politics of Cold War

Liberalism

CONTAINMENT IN THE
POSTCOLONIAL WORLD
The Cold War and Colonial

Independence

John F. Kennedy and the

Cold War

Making a Commitment

in Vietnam

804

