806

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Containment and a Divided
Global Order
The Cold War began on the heels of World War II and
ended in 1991 with the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
While  it  lasted,  this  conflict  raised  two  critical  ques-
tions at the center of global history: What conditions,
and  whose  interests,  would  determine  the  balance  of
power in Europe and Asia? And how would the devel-
oping  nations  (the  European  colonies  in  Asia,  the
Middle East, and Africa) gain their independence and
take their places on the world stage? Cold War rivalry
framed  the  possible  answers  to  both  questions  as  it
drew  the  United  States  into  a  prolonged  engagement
with  world  affairs,  unprecedented  in  the  nation’s  his-
tory, that continues to the present day.

Origins of the Cold War
World War II set the basic conditions for the Cold War.
With  Germany  and  Japan  defeated  and  Britain  and
France weakened by years of war, only two geopolitical
powers remained standing in 1945. Even had nothing
divided them, the United States and the Soviet Union
would have jostled each other as they moved to fill the

postwar power vacuum. But, of course, the two coun-
tries  were  divided — by  geography,  history,  ideology,
and  strategic  interest.  Little  united  them  other  than
their commitment to defeating the Axis powers. Presi-
dent Franklin Roosevelt understood that maintaining
the U.S.-Soviet alliance was essential for postwar global
stability. But he also believed that permanent peace and
long-term  U.S.  interests  depended  on  the  Wilsonian
principles  of  collective  security,  self-determination,
and free trade (Chapter 21).

Yalta  At  the  Yalta  Conference  of  February  1945,
Wilsonian principles yielded to U.S.-Soviet power real-
ities.  As  Allied  forces  neared  victory  in  Europe  and
advanced  toward  Japan  in  the  Pacific,  Roosevelt,
Churchill, and Stalin met in Yalta, a resort in southern
Ukraine on the Black Sea. Roosevelt focused on main-
taining Allied unity and securing Stalin’s commitment
to  enter  the  war  against  Japan.  But  the  fates  of  the
nations of Eastern Europe divided the Big Three. Stalin
insisted  that  Russian  national  security  required  pro-
Soviet  governments  in  Eastern  Europe.  Roosevelt
pressed for an agreement, the “Declaration on Liberated
Europe,” that guaranteed self-determination and dem-
ocratic elections in Poland and neighboring countries,
such  as  Romania  and  Hungary.  However,  given  the

East Meets West
With an “East Meets West”
placard providing inspiration,
Private Frank B. Huff of Virginia
(on the left) and a Russian
soldier shake hands. Huff was
one of the ﬁrst four Americans
to contact the Russians when
the two armies met at the River
Elbe (seen in the background of
this photo) in eastern Germany,
on April 25, 1945. The good will
in evidence in the spring of 1945,
as Americans and Russians alike
celebrated the defeat of Nazi
Germany, would within two
short years be replaced by
Cold War suspicion and
hostility. © Bettmann/Corbis.

