presence of Soviet troops in those nations, FDR had to
accept a pledge from Stalin to hold “free and unfettered
elections” at a  future time. The three leaders also for-
malized  their  commitment  to  divide  Germany  into
four  administrative  zones,  each  controlled  by  one  of
the four Allied powers, and to similarly partition the
capital city, Berlin, which was located in the middle of
the Soviet zone.

At Yalta, the Big Three also agreed to establish an
international  body  to  replace  the  discredited  League
of  Nations.  Based  on  plans  drawn  up  at  the  1944
Dumbarton Oaks conference in Washington, D.C., the
new organization, to be known as the United Nations,
would  have  both  a  General  Assembly,  in  which  all
nations would be represented, and a Security Council
composed of the five major Allied powers — the United
States, Britain, France, China, and the Soviet Union —
and  seven  other  nations  elected  on  a  rotating  basis.
The  Big  Three  determined  that  the  five  permanent
members  of  the  Security  Council  should  have  veto
power  over  decisions  of  the  General  Assembly.  They
announced that the United Nations would convene for
the first time in San Francisco on April 25, 1945.

Potsdam  Following  the  Yalta  Conference,  develop-
ments over the ensuing year further hardened relations
between  the  Soviets  on  one  side  and  the  Americans
and British on the other. At the  Potsdam  Conference
outside Berlin in July 1945, Harry Truman replaced the
deceased Roosevelt. Inexperienced in world affairs and
thrown  into  enormously  complicated  negotiations,
Truman’s  instinct  was  to  stand  up  to  Stalin.  “Unless
Russia is faced with an iron fist and strong language,”
he  said,  “another  war  is  in  the  making.”  But  Truman
was in no position to realign events in Eastern Europe,
where  Soviet-imposed  governments  in  Poland,  Hun-
gary, and Romania were backed by the Red Army and
could not be eliminated by Truman’s bluster. In Poland
and Romania, in particular, Stalin was determined to
establish  communist  governments,  punish  wartime
Nazi collaborators, and win boundary concessions that
augmented  Soviet  territory  (the  Soviet  leader  sought
eastern Polish lands for the Soviet Union and sought to
make far northeastern Germany part of Poland).

Yalta and Potsdam thus set the stage for communist
rule  to  descend  over  Eastern  Europe.  The  elections
called  for  at  Yalta  eventually  took  place  in  Finland,
Hungary, Bulgaria, and Czechoslovakia, with varying
degrees  of  democratic  openness.  Nevertheless,  Stalin
got  the  client  regimes  he  desired  in  those  countries
and  would  soon  exert  near-complete  control  over
their  governments.  Stalin’s  unwillingness  to  honor

CHAPTER 25

  Cold War America, 1945–1963

807

self-determination for nations in Eastern Europe was,
from  the  American  point  of  view,  the  precipitating
event of the Cold War.

Germany  represented  the  biggest  challenge  of  all.
American officials at Potsdam believed that a revived
German economy was essential to ensuring the pros-
perity  of  democratic  regimes  throughout  Western
Europe — and  to  keeping  ordinary  Germans  from
turning  again  to  Nazism.  In  contrast,  Stalin  hoped
merely  to  extract  reparations  from  Germany  in  the
form  of  industrial  machines  and  goods.  In  exchange
for  recognizing  the  new  German-Polish  border,
Truman and Secretary of State James Byrnes convinced
the  Soviet  leader  to  accept  German  reparations  only
from the Soviet zone, which lay in the far eastern, and
largely rural, portion of Germany and promised little
wealth  or  German  industry  to  plunder.  As  they  had
done  for  Europe  as  a  whole,  the  Yalta  and  Potsdam
agreements paved the way for the division of Germany
into East and West (Map 25.1).

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
How did American and
Soviet viewpoints differ
over the postwar fate of
Europe?

Yalta  and  Potsdam  had  demonstrated  that  in  pri-
vate  negotiations  the  United  States  and  the  Soviet
Union  had  starkly  different  objectives.  Subsequent
public  utterances  only  intensified  those  differences.
In February 1946, Stalin delivered
a  speech  in  which  he  insisted
that,  according
to  Marxist-
Leninist principles, “the uneven-
the
ness  of  development  of
capitalist  countries”  was  likely
to  produce  “violent  disturbance”
and even another war. He seemed
to blame any future war on the capitalist West. Churchill
responded  in  kind  a  month  later.  While  visiting
Truman  in  Missouri  to  be  honored  for  his  wartime
leadership, Churchill accused Stalin of raising an “iron
curtain” around Eastern Europe and allowing “police
government” to rule its people. He went further, claim-
ing  that  “a  fraternal  association  of  English-speaking
peoples,”  and  not  Russians,  ought  to  set  the  terms  of
the postwar world.

The cities and fields of Europe had barely ceased to
run with the blood of World War II before they were
menaced again by the tense standoff between the Soviet
Union  and  the  United  States.  With  Stalin  intent  on
establishing  client  states  in  Eastern  Europe  and  the
United States equally intent on reviving Germany and
ensuring  collective  security  throughout  Europe,  the
points of agreement were few and far between. Among
the Allies, anxiety about a Nazi victory in World War II
had been quickly replaced by fear of a potentially more
cataclysmic war with the Soviet Union.

