808

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

ICELAND

NATO members
Warsaw Pact members
Neutral nations

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

N

E

W

S

Norwegian
Sea

F
I
N
L
A
N
D

N
E
D
E
W
S

Y
A
W
R
O
N

Leningrad

S O V I E T   U N I O N

IRELAND

UNITED
KINGDOM

North
Sea

DENMARK

a
e
S

Baltic

Berlin Divided

London

NETH.

EAST

Berlin

GER.

BELG.

Bonn

Warsaw

POLAND

West
Berlin

American zone
British zone
French zone
Soviet zone

B
e
r
l

in
W
East
all
Berlin
(1
9
61–
8
9)

Paris

LUX.

WEST
GER.

CZECH.

FRANCE

SWITZ.

AUSTRIA

HUNGARY

In 1947, America, Britain, and France merged
their zones of occupation as West Berlin.

ITALY

YUGOSLAVIA

Rome

ALB.

ROMANIA

Black Sea

BULGARIA

Constantinople

TURKEY

GREECE

IRAN

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

L
A
G
U
T
R
O
P

SPAIN

MOROCCO

ALGERIA

TUNISIA

M e d i t e r r a n e a n   S e a

CYPRUS
(U.K.)

LEB.

SYRIA

IRAQ

MAP 25.1
Cold War in Europe, 1955

This map vividly shows the Cold War division of Europe. The NATO countries (colored green) are
allies of the United States; the Warsaw Pact countries (in purple) are allied to the USSR. At that
point, West Germany had just been admitted to NATO, completing Europe’s stabilization into two
rival camps. But Berlin remained divided, and one can see from its location deep in East Germany
why the former capital was always a ﬂash point in Cold War controversies.

The Containment Strategy
In the late 1940s, American officials developed a clear
strategy toward the Soviet Union that would become
known as containment. Convinced that the USSR was
methodically  expanding  its  reach,  the  United  States
would counter by limiting Stalin’s influence to Eastern
Europe  while reconstituting democratic governments
in Western Europe. In 1946–1947, three specific issues
worried  Truman  and  his  advisors.  First,  the  Soviet
Union was pressing Iran for access to oil and Turkey
for access to the Mediterranean. Second, a civil war was
roiling  in  Greece,  between  monarchists  backed  by
England  and  insurgents  supported  by  the  Greek  and

Yugoslavian  Communist  parties.  Third,  as  European
nations suffered through terrible privation in 1946 and
1947, Communist parties gained strength, particularly
in  France  and  Italy.  All  three  developments,  as  seen
from the United States, threatened to expand the influ-
ence of the Soviet Union outside of Eastern Europe.

Toward an Uneasy Peace
In this anxious context,
the  strategy  of  containment  emerged  in  a  series  of
incremental steps between 1946 and 1949. In February
1946, American diplomat George F. Kennan first pro-
posed the idea in an 8,000-word cable — a confidential
message to the U.S. State Department — from his post
at the U.S. embassy in Moscow. Kennan argued that the

