Soviet  Union  was  an  “Oriental  despotism”  and  that
communism was merely the “fig leaf ” justifying Soviet
aggression. A year after writing this cable (dubbed the
Long  Telegram),  he  published  an  influential  Foreign
Affairs  article,  arguing  that  the  West’s  only  recourse
was to meet the Soviets “with unalterable counter-force
at  every  point  where  they  show  signs  of  encroaching
upon  the  interests  of  a  peaceful  and  stable  world.”
Kennan called for “long-term, patient but firm and vig-
ilant  containment  of  Russian  expansive  tendencies.”
Containment, the key word, came to define Amer ica’s
evolving strategic stance toward the Soviet Union.

To see a longer excerpt of the Long Telegram,
along with other primary sources from this period,
see Sources for America’s History.

Kennan believed that the Soviet system was inher-
ently unstable and would eventually collapse. Con tain-
ment would work, he reasoned, as long as the United
States  and  its  allies  opposed  Soviet  expansion  in  all
parts of the world. Kennan’s attentive readers included
Stalin himself, who quickly obtained a copy of the clas-
sified Long Telegram. The Soviet leader saw the United
States as an imperialist aggressor determined to replace
Great Britain as the world’s dominant capitalist power.
Just as Kennan thought that the Soviet system was des-
potic and unsustainable, Stalin believed that the West
suffered  from  its  own  fatal  weaknesses.  Neither  side
completely understood or trusted the other, and each
projected its worst fears onto the other.

In fact, Britain’s influence in the world was declin-
ing.  Exhausted  by  the  war,  facing  enormous  budget
deficits  and  a  collapsing  economy  at  home,  and  con-
fronted with a determined independence movement in
India led by Mohandas Gandhi and growing national-
ist movements throughout its empire, Britain was wan-
ing as a global power. “The reins of world leadership
are fast slipping from Britain’s competent but now very
weak  hands,”  read  a  U.S.  State  Department  report.
“These  reins  will  be  picked  up  either  by  the  United
States or by Russia.” The United States was wedded to
the  notion — dating  to  the  Wilson  administration —
that communism and capitalism were incompatible on
the world stage. With Britain faltering, American offi-
cials saw little choice but to fill its shoes.

It did not take long for the reality of Britain’s decline
to  resonate  across  the  Atlantic.  In  February  1947,
London  informed  Truman  that  it  could  no  longer
afford to support the anticommunists in the Greek civil
war.  Truman  worried  that  a  communist  victory  in
Greece would lead to Soviet domination of the eastern

CHAPTER 25

  Cold War America, 1945–1963

809

Mediterranean  and  embolden  Communist  parties  in
France and Italy. In response, the president announced
what  became  known  as  the  Truman  Doctrine.  In  a
speech on March 12, he asserted an American respon-
sibility  “to  support  free  peoples  who  are  resisting
attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by out-
side pressures.” To that end, Truman proposed large-
scale assistance for Greece and Turkey (then involved
in a dispute with the Soviet Union over the Dardanelles,
a strait connecting the Aegean Sea and the Sea of Mar-
mara). “If we falter in our leadership, we may endanger
the  peace  of  the  world,”  Truman  declared  (Thinking
Like a Historian, p. 810). Despite the open-endedness
of this military commitment, Congress quickly approved
Truman’s request for $300 million in aid to Greece and
$100 million for Turkey.

Soviet  expansionism  was  part  of  a  larger  story.
Europe was sliding into economic chaos. Already dev-
astated by the war, in 1947 the continent suffered the
worst winter in memory. People were starving, credit
was  nonexistent,  wages  were  stagnant,  and  the  con-
sumer  market  had  collapsed.  For  both  humanitarian
and practical reasons, Truman’s advisors believed some-
thing had to be done. A global depression might ensue
if the European economy, the largest foreign market for
American goods, did not recover. Worse, unemployed
and dispirited Western Europeans might fill the ranks
of the Communist Party, threatening political stability
and  the  legitimacy  of  the  United  States.  Secretary  of
State George C. Marshall came up with a remarkable
proposal:  a  massive  infusion  of  American  capital  to
rebuild  the  European  economy.  Speaking  at  the  Har-
vard University commencement in June 1947, Marshall
urged the nations of Europe to work out a comprehen-
sive recovery program based on U.S. aid.

This  pledge  of  financial  assistance  required  con-
gressional approval, but the plan ran into opposition in
Wash ington. Republicans castigated the Marshall Plan
as a huge “international WPA.” But in the midst of the
congressional stalemate, on February 25, 1948, Stalin
supported  a  communist-led  coup  in  Czechoslovakia.
Congress rallied and voted overwhelmingly in 1948 to
approve  the  Marshall  Plan.  Over  the  next  four  years,
the  United  States  contributed  nearly  $13  billion  to  a
highly  successful  recovery  effort
that  benefitted  both  Western
Europe  and  the  United  States.
European  industrial  production
increased  by  64  percent,  and  the
appeal  of  Communist  parties
waned  in  the  West.  Markets  for
American  goods  grew  stronger

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
Why did the United States
enact the Marshall Plan,
and how did the program
illustrate America’s new
role in the world?

