T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

The Global Cold War

Until 1950, the U.S. policy of containment was conﬁned to economic measures,
such  as  ﬁnancial  assistance  to  Greece  and  Turkey  and  the  Marshall  Plan,  and
focused on Europe. That changed between 1950 and 1954. In those years, con-
tainment became militarized, and its scope was expanded to include Asia and
Latin America. What had begun as a limited policy to contain Soviet inﬂuence in
war-torn Europe had by the mid-1950s become a global campaign against com-
munism and social revolution.

1.  President Harry S. Truman, address before joint

session of Congress, March 12, 1947. Known as the
Truman Doctrine, this speech outlined Truman’s
plan to give large-scale assistance to Greece and
Turkey as part of a broader anticommunist policy.

To ensure the peaceful development of nations, free
from coercion, the United States has taken a leading
part in establishing the United Nations. The United
Nations is designed to make possible lasting freedom
and independence for all its members. We shall not real-
ize our objectives, however, unless we are willing to help
free peoples to maintain their free institutions and their
national integrity against aggressive movements that seek
to impose upon them totalitarian regimes. . . .

At the present moment in world history nearly every
nation must choose between alternative ways of life. The
choice is too often not a free one.

One way of life is based upon the will of the majority,

and is distinguished by free institutions, representative
government, free elections, guarantees of individual lib-
erty, freedom of speech and religion, and freedom from
political oppression.

The second way of life is based upon the will of a
minority forcibly imposed upon the majority. It relies
upon terror and oppression, a controlled press and radio;
fixed elections, and the suppression of personal freedoms.
I believe that it must be the policy of the United States
to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subju-
gation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.

I believe that we must assist free peoples to work out

their own destinies in their own way.

I believe that our help should be primarily through
economic and financial aid which is essential to economic
stability and orderly political processes.

2.  Syngman Rhee, president of South Korea, criticiz-

ing U.S. policy in 1950. The Korean War,
1950–1953, represented the militarization of the
Truman Doctrine.

810

A few days ago one American friend said that if the
U.S. gave weapons to South Korea, she feared that South
Korea would invade North Korea. This is a useless worry
of some Americans, who do not know South Korea. Our
present war is not a Cold War, but a real shooting war.
Our troops will take all possible counter-measures. . . .
In South Korea the U.S. has one foot in South Korea and
one foot outside so that in case of an unfavorable situa-
tion it could pull out of the country. I daresay that if the
U.S. wants to aid our country, it should not be only lip-
service.

3.  Secretary of State Dean Acheson’s testimony
before the Senate Armed Forces and Foreign
Relations Committee, 1951.

The attack on Korea was . . . a challenge to the whole
system of collective security, not only in the Far East,
but everywhere in the world. It was a threat to all
nations newly arrived at independence. . . .

This was a test which would decide whether our

collective security system would survive or would
crumble. It would determine whether other nations
would be intimidated by this show of force. . . .

As a people we condemn aggression of any kind.
We reject appeasement of any kind. If we stood with
our arms folded while Korea was swallowed up, it
would have meant abandoning our principles, and it
would have meant the defeat of the collective security
system on which our own safety ultimately depends.

4.  Shigeru Yoshida, prime minister of Japan, speech

before the Japanese Diet (parliament), July 14, 1950.

It is heartening . . . that America and so many mem-
bers of the United Nations have gone to the rescue of
an invaded country regardless of the heavy sacrifices
involved. In case a war breaks out on an extensive scale
how would Japan’s security be preserved [since we are
disarmed]? . . . This has been hotly discussed. However,
the measures taken by the United Nations have done
much to stabilize our people’s minds.

