5.  John Foster Dulles, secretary of state (1953–1959),
June 30, 1954, radio and television address to the
American people. In 1951, Jacobo Arbenz was
elected president of Guatemala. Arbenz pursued
reform policies that threatened large landholders,
including the United Fruit Company. In 1954, the
United States CIA engineered a coup that over-
threw Arbenz and replaced him with Carlos Castillo
Armas, a colonel in the Guatemalan military.

Tonight I should like to speak with you about Guatemala.
It is the scene of dramatic events. They expose the evil
purpose of the Kremlin to destroy the inter-American
system, and they test the ability of the American States
to maintain the peaceful integrity of the hemisphere.

For several years international communism has been
probing here and there for nesting places in the Americas.
It finally chose Guatemala as a spot which it could turn
into an official base from which to breed subversion
which would extend to other American Republics.

This intrusion of Soviet despotism was, of course,

a direct challenge to our Monroe Doctrine, the first
and most fundamental of our foreign policies.

6.  Guillermo Toriello, Guatemalan foreign minister,
speech to delegates at the Tenth Inter-American
Conference of the Organization of American
States in Caracas, Venezuela, March 5, 1954.

What is the real and effective reason for describing our
government as communist? From what sources comes
the accusation that we threaten continental solidarity
and security? Why do they [United States] wish to
intervene in Guatemala?

The answers are simple and evident. The plan of
national liberation being carried out with firmness by my
government has necessarily affected the privileges of the
foreign enterprises that are impeding the progress and the
economic development of the country. . . . With construc-
tion of publically owned ports and docks, we are putting
an end to the monopoly of the United Fruit Company. . . .
They wanted to find a ready expedient to maintain the

economic dependence of the American Republics and
suppress the legitimate desires of their peoples, catalogu-
ing as “communism” every manifestation of nationalism
or economic independence, any desire for social progress,
any intellectual curiosity, and any interest in progressive
and liberal reforms.

7.  Herblock cartoon from the Washington Post,
February 11, 1962. Many Latin American coun-
tries were beset by a wide gap between a small
wealthy elite and the mass of ordinary, much
poorer citizens. American ofﬁcials worried that this
made social revolution an attractive alternative for
those at the bottom.

A 1962 Herblock Cartoon, by The Herb Block Foundation.

Sources: (1) The Avalon Project at avalon.law.yale.edu; (2) Reinhard Drifte, “Japan’s
Involvement in the Korean War,” in The Korean War in History, ed. James Cotton
and Ian Neary (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press International, 1989), 43;
(3) Glenn D. Paige, The Korean Decision (New York: The Free Press, 1968), 175–176;
(4) Drifte, 122; (5) Jonathan L. Fried et al., eds., Guatemala in Rebellion: Unfinished
History (New York: Grove Press, 1983), 78; (6) Stephen C. Schlesinger and Stephen
Kinzer, Bitter Fruit: The Untold Story of the American Coup in Guatemala (Garden
City, NY: Doubleday, 1982), 143–144.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  In source 1, Truman presents the choice facing the world
in stark terms: totalitarianism or democracy. Why would
he frame matters in this way in 1947? How did Truman
anticipate the militarization of American foreign policy?

2.  Analyze the audience, purpose, and point of view pre-

sented in the documents dealing with the war in Korea
(sources 2–4). What does Acheson mean by “collective
security”? Why is Yoshida thankful for the UN interven-
tion? What can you infer about U.S. involvement in
world affairs during the postwar period based on these
documents?

3.  In document 6, how does Toriello characterize accusa-
tions that the elected Guatemalan government is com-
munist? What are his accusations of the United States?

4.  How does source 7 express one of the obstacles to

democracy in developing nations?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Using these documents, and based on what you have
learned in class and in this chapter, write an essay in which
you analyze the goals of American foreign policy during the
early years of the Cold War.

811

