812

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

the  four  zones  of  occupation  into  a  single  state,  the
Western allies consolidated their three zones in 1947.
They then prepared to establish an independent federal
German  republic.  Marshall  Plan  funds  would  jump-
start  economic  recovery.  Some  of  those  funds  were
slated  for  West  Berlin,  in  hopes  of  making  the  city  a
capitalist  showplace  100  miles  deep  inside  the  Soviet
zone.

Stung  by  the  West’s  intention  to  create  a  German
republic,  in  June  1948  Stalin  blockaded  all  traffic  to
West Berlin. Instead of yielding, as Stalin had expected,
Truman and the British were resolute. “We are going to
stay, period,” Truman said plainly. Over the next year,
American and British pilots, who had been dropping
bombs on Berlin only four years earlier, improvised the
Berlin Airlift, which flew 2.5 million tons of food and
fuel into the Western zones of the city — nearly a ton
for each resident. Military officials reported to Truman
that General Lucius D. Clay, the American commander
in Berlin, was nervous and on edge, “drawn as tight as
a steel spring.” But after a prolonged stalemate, Stalin
backed down: on May 12, 1949, he lifted the blockade.
Until the Cuban missile crisis in 1962, the Berlin crisis
was the closest the two sides came to actual war, and
West  Berlin  became  a  symbol  of  resistance  to
communism.

The  crisis  in  Berlin  persuaded  Western  European
nations  to  forge  a  collective  security  pact  with  the
United States. In April 1949, for the first time since the
end  of  the  American  Revolution,  the  United  States
entered  into  a  peacetime  military  alliance,  the  North
Atlantic  Treaty  Organization  (NATO).  Under  the
NATO pact, twelve nations — Belgium, Canada, Den-
mark,  France,  Great  Britain,  Iceland,  Italy,  Lux em-
bourg,  the  Netherlands,  Norway,  Portugal,  and  the
United  States — agreed  that  “an  armed  attack  against
one or more of them in Europe or North America shall
be considered an attack against them all.” In May 1949,
those nations also agreed to the creation of the Federal
Republic of Germany (West Germany), which eventu-
ally  joined  NATO  in  1955.  In  response,  the  Soviet
Union  established  the  German  Democratic  Republic
(East  Germany);  the  Council  for  Mutual  Economic
Assistance  (COMECON);  and,  in  1955,  the  Warsaw
Pact,  a  military  alliance  for  Eastern  Europe  that
included Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Ger-
many,  Hungary,  Poland,  Romania,  and  the  Soviet
Union. In these parallel steps, the two superpowers had
institutionalized the Cold War through a massive divi-
sion of the continent.

By  the  early  1950s,  West  and  East  were  the  stark
markers of the new Europe. As Churchill had observed

The Marshall Plan

Ofﬁcials from the United States and Britain watch as the ﬁrst
shipment of Caribbean sugar provided under the Marshall
Plan arrives in England, lowered from the decks of the Royal
Victoria. Passed by Congress in 1948, the Marshall Plan (known
ofﬁcially as the European Recovery Program) committed the
United States to spend $17 billion over a four-year period to
assist the war-ravaged nations of Western Europe. Marshall
Plan funds helped the struggling British, French, and especially
German economies, but they also beneﬁtted the United
States itself: the plan required European nations who par-
ticipated to purchase most of their goods from American
companies. Keystone/Getty Images.

and  fostered  economic  interdependence  between
Europe  and  the  United  States.  Notably,  however,  the
Marshall Plan intensified Cold War tensions. U.S. offi-
cials invited the Soviets to participate but insisted on
certain  restrictions  that  would  virtually  guarantee
Stalin’s  refusal.  When  Stalin  refused,  ordering  Soviet
client  states  to  do  so  as  well,  the  onus  of  dividing
Europe  appeared  to  fall  on  the  Soviet  leader  and
deprived  his  threadbare  partners  of  assistance  they
sorely needed.

East and West in the New Europe  The flash point
for a hot war remained Germany, the most important
industrial economy and the key strategic landmass in
Europe. When no agreement could be reached to unify

