CHAPTER 25

  Cold War America, 1945–1963

813

The Berlin Airlift

For 321 days U.S. planes like this one ﬂew missions
to bring food and other supplies to Berlin after the
Soviet Union had blocked all surface routes into the
former German capital. The blockade was ﬁnally
lifted on May 12, 1949, after the Soviets conceded
that it had been a failure. AP Images.

in  1946,  the  line  dividing  the  two  stretched  “from
Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic,” cutting
off tens of millions of Eastern Europeans from the rest
of the continent. Stalin’s tactics had often been ruthless,
but  they  were  not  without  reason.  The  Soviet  Union
acted  out  of  the  sort  of  self-interest  that  had  long
defined powerful nations — ensuring a defensive perim-
eter of allies, seeking access to raw materials, and press-
ing the advantage that victory in war allowed.

NSC-68  Atomic developments, too, played a critical
role  in  the  emergence  of  the  Cold  War.  As  the  sole
nuclear power at the end of World War II, the United
States entertained the possibility of international con-
trol of nuclear technology but did not wish to lose its
advantage over the Soviet Union. When the American
Bernard Baruch proposed United Nations oversight of
atomic energy in 1946, for instance, the plan assured
the United States of near-total control of the technology,
which further increased Cold War tensions. America’s
brief tenure as sole nuclear power ended in September
1949,  however,  when  the  Soviet  Union  detonated  an
atomic bomb. Truman then turned to the U.S. National
Security  Council  (NSC),  established  by  the  National
Security Act of 1947, for a strategic reassessment.

In April 1950, the NSC delivered its report, known
as  NSC-68. Bristling with alarmist rhetoric, the docu-
ment  marked  a  decisive  turning  point  in  the  U.S.
approach  to  the  Cold  War.  The  report’s  authors
described the Soviet Union not as a typical great power
but as one with a “fanatic faith” that seeks to “impose
its  absolute  authority.”  Going  beyond  even  the  stern

language used by George Kennan, NSC-68 cast Soviet
ambitions as nothing short of “the domination of the
Eurasian landmass.”

To  prevent  that  outcome,  the  report  proposed  “a
bold  and  massive  program  of  rebuilding  the  West’s
defensive potential to surpass that of the Soviet world”
(America Compared, p. 814). This included the devel-
opment of a hydrogen bomb, a thermonuclear device
that would be a thousand times more destructive than
the  atomic  bombs  dropped  on  Japan,  as  well  as  dra-
matic increases in conventional military forces. Criti-
cally, NSC-68 called for Americans to pay higher taxes
to  support  the  new  military  program  and  to  accept
whatever sacrifices were necessary to achieve national
unity of purpose against the Soviet enemy. Many histo-
rians see the report as having “militarized” the Ameri-
can approach to the Cold War, which had to that point
relied  largely  on  economic  measures  such  as  aid  to
Greece and the Marshall Plan. Truman was reluctant to
commit  to  a  major  defense  buildup,  fearing  that  it
would  overburden  the  national  budget.  But  shortly
after NSC-68 was completed, events in Asia led him to
reverse course.

Containment in Asia
As  with  Germany,  American  officials  believed  that
restoring  Japan’s  economy,  while  limiting  its  military
influence,  would  ensure  prosperity  and  contain  com-
munism in East Asia. After dismantling Japan’s military,
American  occupation  forces  under  General  Douglas
MacArthur  drafted  a  democratic  constitution  and

