A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Arming for the

Cold War

To ﬁght the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union increased overall
military spending and assembled massive arsenals of nuclear weapons.

TABLE 25.1

Worldwide Nuclear Stockpiles, 1945–1975

Country

1945

United States

USSR

United Kingdom

France

China

Israel

*Estimated

2

0

0

0

0

0

1955

3,057

200

10

0

0

0

1965

32,135

6,129

310

32

5

0

1975

27,235

19,443

350

188

185

*
20

SOURCES: Adapted from Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, National Resources Defense Council,
and Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation (2007).

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Do you see evidence of the effects of NSC-68 in this table? What kinds of changes

did NSC-68 bring about?

2.  In what ways does the data in this table suggest the emergence of two “superpow-

ers” after World War II?

paved  the  way  for  the  restoration  of  Japanese  sover-
eignty  in  1951.  Considering  the  scorched-earth  war
that  had  just  ended,  this  was  a  remarkable  achieve-
ment,  thanks  partly  to  the  imperious  MacArthur  but
mainly  to  the  Japanese,  who  embraced  peace  and
accepted U.S. military protection. However, events on
the mainland of Asia proved much more difficult for
the United States to shape to its advantage.

Civil War  in  China  A civil war had been raging in
China since the 1930s as Communist forces led by Mao
Zedong  (Mao  Tse-tung)  fought  Nationalist  forces
under Jiang Jieshi (Chiang Kai-shek). Fearing a Com-
munist  victory,  between  1945  and  1949  the  United
States  provided  $2  billion  to  Jiang’s  army.  Pressing
Truman  to  “save”  China,  conser-
vative  Republican  Ohio  senator
Robert A. Taft  predicted that “the
Far  East  is  ultimately  even  more
important  to  our  future  peace
than  is  Europe.”  By  1949,  Mao’s

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did U.S. containment
strategy in Asia compare
to containment in Europe?

814

forces  held  the  advantage.  Truman  reasoned  that  to
save Jiang, the United States would have to intervene
militarily. Unwilling to do so, he cut off aid and left the
National ists  to  their  fate.  The  People’s  Republic  of
China  was formally established  under Mao  on Octo-
ber 1, 1949, and the remnants of Jiang’s forces fled to
Taiwan.

Both Stalin and Truman expected Mao to take an
independent  line,  as  the  Communist  leader  Tito  had
just done in Yugoslavia. Mao, however, aligned himself
with the Soviet Union, partly out of fear that the United
States  would  re-arm  the  Nationalists  and  invade  the
mainland.  As  attitudes  hardened,  many  Americans
viewed Mao’s success as a defeat for the United States.
The  pro-Nationalist  “China  lobby”  accused  Truman’s
State Department of being responsible for the “loss” of
China. Sensitive to these charges, the Truman adminis-
tration refused to recognize “Red China” and blocked
China’s  admission  to  the  United  Nations.  But  the
United States pointedly declined to guarantee Taiwan’s
independence, and in fact accepted the outcome on the

