CHAPTER 25

  Cold War America, 1945–1963

815

Communist China

People in Beijing raise their
clenched ﬁsts in a welcoming
salute for Chinese Communist
forces entering the city after
the Nationalists surrendered
on January 31, 1949. The
cen ter portrait behind them
is of General Mao Zedong, the
leader of the Communist Party
of China. Mao’s victory in the
civil war (1946–1950) meant
that from East Germany to
the Paciﬁc Ocean, much of
the Eurasian landmass (includ-
ing Eastern Europe, the Soviet
Union, and China) was ruled
by Communist governments.
AP Images.

mainland. (Since 1982, however, the United States has
recognized Taiwanese sovereignty.)

The Korean War  The United States took a stronger
stance  in  Korea.  The  United  States  and  the  Soviet
Union  had  agreed  at  the  close  of  World  War  II  to
occupy  the  Korean  peninsula  jointly,  temporarily

dividing the former Japanese colony at the 38th paral-
lel. As tensions rose in Europe, the 38th parallel hard-
ened into a permanent demarcation line. The Soviets
supported  a  Communist  government,  led  by  Kim  Il
Sung, in North Korea; the United States backed a right-
wing Nationalist, Syngman Rhee, in South Korea. The
two  sides  had  waged  low-level  war  since  1945,  and

The Korean War

As a result of President Truman’s
1948 Executive Order 9981, for
the ﬁrst time in the nation’s
history all troops in the Korean
War served in racially integrated
combat units. This photo taken
during the Battle of Ch’ongch’on
in 1950 shows a sergeant and
his men of the 2nd Infantry
Division. National Archives.

