CHAPTER 25

  Cold War America, 1945–1963

817

capital,  and  almost  all  the  territory  up  to  the  38th
parallel.

The impetuous MacArthur then ordered his troops
across  the  38th  parallel  and  led  them  all  the  way  to
the  Chinese  border  at  the  Yalu  River.  It  was  a  major
blunder,  certain  to  draw  China  into  the  war.  Sure
enough,  a  massive  Chinese  counterattack  forced
MacArthur’s  forces  into  headlong  retreat  back  down
the  Korean  peninsula.  Then  stalemate  set  in.  With
weak public support for the war in the United States,
Truman and his advisors decided to work for a negoti-
ated peace. MacArthur disagreed and denounced the
Korean  stalemate,  declaring,  “There  is  no  substitute
for  victory.”  On  April  11,  1951,  Truman  relieved
MacArthur  of  his  command.  Truman’s  decision  was
highly  unpopular,  especially  among  conservative
Republicans, but he had likely saved the nation from
years of costly warfare with China.

Notwithstanding  MacArthur’s  dismissal,  the  war
dragged on for more than two years. An armistice in
July  1953,  pushed  by  the  newly  elected  president,

Dwight D. Eisenhower, left Korea divided at the origi-
nal  demarcation  line.  North  Korea  remained  firmly
allied  with  the  Soviet  Union;  South  Korea  signed  a
mutual  defense  treaty  with  the  United  States.  It  had
been  the  first  major  proxy  battle  of  the  Cold  War,  in
which the Soviet Union and United States took sides in
a civil conflict. It would not be the last.

The  Korean  War  had  far-reaching  consequences.
Truman’s decision to commit troops without congres-
sional  approval  set  a  precedent  for  future  undeclared
wars. His refusal to unleash atomic bombs, even when
American forces were reeling under a massive Chinese
attack,  set  ground  rules  for  Cold  War  conflict.  The
war  also  expanded  American  involvement  in  Asia,
transforming containment into a truly global policy —
and  significantly  boosting  Japan’s  struggling  postwar
economy.  Finally,  the  Korean  War  ended  Truman’s
resistance to a major military buildup. Defense expen-
ditures  grew  from  $13  billion  in  1950,  roughly  one-
third  of  the  federal  budget,  to  $50  billion  in  1953,
nearly two-thirds of the budget (Map 25.3). American

MAP 25.3
The Military-Industrial Complex

Defense spending gave a big boost
to the Cold War economy, but, as the
upper map suggests, the beneﬁts were
by no means equally distributed. The
big winners were the Middle Atlantic
states, the industrialized Upper Mid-
west, Washington State (with its
aircraft and nuclear plants), and
California. The epicenter of Cali-
fornia’s military-industrial complex
was Los Angeles, which, as is evident
in the lower map, was studded with
military facilities and major defense
contractors like Douglas Aircraft,
Lockheed, and General Dynamics.
There was work aplenty for engi-
neers and rocket scientists.

(cid:4)
Los
Angeles

Marquardt

Lockheed

Rocketdyne

Grand Central Rocket

W

N

S

E

H

Douglas-
Santa Monica

H

(cid:15)
(cid:15)

North
American

Vet. Admin.
Center

(cid:15)

Firestone
Guided Missile
Northrup

(cid:14)

Washington,
D.C.

Military Contracts, 1952

Per capita value
in proportion
to national average

0–25
25–50

50–100
100+

Plants, 1955

Major plant
Minor plant

Aircraft
and parts

Ordnance
and parts

Aerojet

General Dynamics-
Pomona

Los Angeles County

North American
Space and Info. Systems Div.

Government Military
Facilities (1961)

Douglas-
El Segundo

Military facilities
Airfield
Hospital

(cid:15)

H

5

10 miles

5

10 kilometers

(after Scott; Lotchin)

0

0

Douglas-
Long Beach

Los
Alamitos
Naval Air
Station

H

Naval Station

Todd Shipyards

Naval
Weapons
Station

Orange
County

Marine Air Base

