818

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

FIGURE 25.1
National Defense Spending, 1940–1965

In 1950, the U.S. defense budget was $13 billion, less than
a third of total federal outlays. In 1961, U.S. defense
spending reached $47 billion, fully half of the federal
budget and almost 10 percent of the gross domestic
product.

150

125

100

75

50

25

s
n
o
i
l
l
i

B
$

Total federal spending

Defense spending

0
1940

1945

1950

1955

1960

1965

foreign policy had become more global, more milita-
rized, and more expensive (Figure 25.1). Even in times
of peace, the United States now functioned in a state of
permanent military mobilization.

The Munich Analogy  Behind much of U.S. foreign
policy in the first two decades of the Cold War lay the
memory of appeasement (Chapter 24). The generation
of politicians and officials who designed the contain-
ment  strategy  had  come  of  age  in  the  shadow  of
Munich, the conference in 1938 at which the Western
democracies had appeased Hitler by offering him part
of  Czechoslovakia,  paving  the  road  to  World  War  II.
Applying the lessons of Munich, American presidents
believed that “appeasing” Stalin (and subsequent Soviet
rulers Nikita Khrushchev and Leonid Brezhnev) would
have  the  same  result:  wider  war.  Thus  in  Germany,
Greece, and Korea, and later in Iran, Guatemala, and
Vietnam,  the  United  States  staunchly  resisted  the
Soviets — or what it perceived as Soviet influence. The
Munich  analogy  strengthened  the  U.S.  position  in  a
number of strategic conflicts, particularly over the fate
of  Germany.  But  it  also  drew  Americans  into  armed
conflicts — and convinced them to support repressive,
right-wing  regimes — that  compromised,  as  much  as
supported, stated American principles.

Cold War Liberalism
Harry Truman cast himself in the mold of his prede-
cessor,  Franklin  Roosevelt,  and  hoped  to  seize  the
possibilities  afforded  by  victory  in  World  War  II
to  expand  the  New  Deal  at  home.  But  the  crises  in

postwar Europe and Asia, combined with the spectac-
ular rise of anticommunism in the United States, forced
him to take a different path. In the end, Truman went
down  in  history  not  as  a  New  Dealer,  but  as  a  Cold
Warrior.  The  Cold  War  consensus  that  he  ultimately
embraced — the  notion  that  resisting  communism  at
home and abroad represented America’s most impor-
tant  postwar  objective — shaped  the  nation’s  life  and
politics for decades to come.

Truman and the End of Reform
Truman  and  the  Democratic  Party  of  the  late  1940s
and early 1950s forged what historians call Cold War
liberalism.  They  preserved  the  core  programs  of  the
New  Deal  welfare  state,  developed  the  containment
policy  to  oppose  Soviet  influence  throughout  the
world, and fought so-called subversives at home. But
there would be no second act for the New Deal. The
Demo crats  adopted  this  combination  of  moderate
liberal  policies  and  anticommunism — Cold  War
liberalism — partly by choice and partly out of neces-
sity.  A  few  high-level  espionage  scandals  and  the
Communist  victories  in  Eastern  Europe  and  China
reenergized  the  Repub lican  Party,  which  forced
Truman and the Demo crats to retreat to what histo-
rian  Arthur  Schlesinger  called  the  “vital  center”  of
American  politics.  However,  Ameri cans  on  both  the
progressive  left  and  the  conservative  right  remained
dissatisfied with this development. Cold War liberal-
ism was a practical centrist policy for a turbulent era.
But it would not last.

Organized labor remained a key force in the Demo-
cratic Party and played a central role in championing

