CHAPTER 25

  Cold War America, 1945–1963

819

Cold War liberalism. Stronger than ever, union mem-
bership  swelled  to  more  than  14  million  by  1945.
Determined  to  make  up  for  their  wartime  sacrifices,
unionized  workers  made  aggressive  demands  and
mounted  major  strikes  in  the  automobile,  steel,  and
coal  industries  after  the  war.  Republicans  responded.
They gained control of the House in a sweeping repu-
diation of Democrats in 1946 and promptly passed —
over  Truman’s  veto — the  Taft-Hartley  Act  (1947),  an
overhaul of the 1935 National Labor Relations Act.

Taft-Hartley  crafted  changes  in  procedures  and
language that, over time, weakened the right of work-
ers  to  organize  and  engage  in  collective  bargaining.
Unions especially disliked Section 14b, which allowed
states to pass “right-to-work” laws prohibiting the union
shop. Additionally, the law forced unions to purge com-
munists,  who  had  been  among  the  most  successful
labor organizers in the 1930s, from their ranks. Taft-
Hartley  effectively  “contained”  the  labor  movement.
Trade  unions  would  continue  to  support  the  Demo-
cratic Party, but the labor movement would not move
into the largely non-union South and would not extend
into  the  many  American  industries  that  remained
unorganized.

The 1948 Election  Democrats would have dumped
Truman in 1948 had they found a better candidate. But

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
How was the Democratic
Party divided in 1948, and
what were its primary
constituencies?

the party fell into disarray. The left wing split off and
formed  the  Progressive  Party,  nominating  Henry  A.
Wallace, an avid New Dealer whom Truman had fired
as  secretary  of  commerce  in  1946  because  Wallace
opposed  Amer ica’s  actions  in  the  Cold  War.  A  right-
wing challenge came from the South. When northern
liberals such as Mayor Hubert H. Humphrey of Min-
neapolis pushed through a strong
civil rights platform at the Demo-
cratic  convention,  the  southern
delegations  bolted  and,  calling
themselves Dixiecrats, nominated
for president South Carolina gov-
ernor Strom Thurmond, an ardent
supporter  of  racial  segregation.
The  Republicans  meanwhile  renominated  Thomas  E.
Dewey, the politically moderate governor of New York
who had run a strong campaign against FDR in 1944.
Truman surprised everyone. He launched a strenu-
ous cross-country speaking tour and hammered away
at the Republicans for opposing progressive legislation
and, in general, for running a “do-nothing” Congress.
By combining these issues with attacks on the Soviet
menace abroad, Truman began to salvage his troubled
campaign. At his rallies, enthusiastic listeners shouted,
“Give  ’em  hell,  Harry!”  Truman  won,  receiving  49.6
percent of the vote to Dewey’s 45.1 percent (Map 25.4).

Truman Triumphant

In one of the most famous photographs
in U.S. political history, Harry S. Truman
gloats over an erroneous headline in
the November 3 Chicago Daily Tribune.
Pollsters had predicted an easy victory
for Thomas E. Dewey. Their primitive
techniques, however, missed the dra-
matic surge in support for Truman
during the last days of the campaign.
© Bettmann/Corbis.

