820

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

8

6

4

4

3

3

4

25

4

4

4

4

6

11

10

6

8

15

10

23

9

10

12

19

28 13

25

8

11

11

1

9 11

12

5

43

16

4
8
16
3
8

47

35

11

14

8

8

Candidate

Harry S. Truman
(Democrat)
Thomas E. Dewey
(Republican)
J. Strom Thurmond
(Statesʼ Rights)

Henry A. Wallace
(Progressive)

Electoral
Vote

Popular
Vote

Percent of
Popular Vote

303

24,105,182

189

21,970,065

39

1,169,063

1,157,326

49.6

45.1

2.5

2.5

MAP 25.4
The Presidential Election of 1948

Truman’s electoral strategy in 1948 was to concentrate
his campaign in areas where the Democrats had their
greatest strength. In an election with a low turnout,
Truman held on to enough support from Roosevelt’s
New Deal coalition of blacks, union members, and
farmers to defeat Dewey by more than 2 million
votes.

This  remarkable  election  foreshadowed  coming
political turmoil. Truman occupied the center of FDR’s
sprawling  New  Deal  coalition.  On  his  left  were  pro-
gressives,  civil  rights  advocates,  and  anti–Cold  War
peace activists. On his right were segregationist south-
erners, who opposed civil rights and were allied with
Republicans  on  many  economic  and  foreign  policy
issues. In 1948, Truman performed a delicate balanc-
ing  act,  largely  retaining  the  support  of  Jewish  and
Catholic  voters  in  the  big  cities,  black  voters  in  the
North, and organized labor voters across the country.
But  Thurmond’s  strong  showing — he  carried  four
states  in  the  Deep  South — demonstrated  the  fragile
nature of the Democratic coalition and prefigured the
revolt of the party’s southern wing in the 1960s. As he
tried  to  manage  contending  forces  in  his  own  party,
Truman faced mounting pressure from Republicans to
denounce radicals at home and to take a tough stand
against the Soviet Union.

The Fair Deal  Despite having to perform a balanc-
ing  act,  Truman  and  progressive  Democrats  forged
ahead.  In  1949,  reaching  ambitiously  to  extend  the
New  Deal,  Truman  proposed  the  Fair  Deal:  national

health insurance, aid to education, a housing program,
expansion of Social Security, a higher minimum wage,
and a new agricultural program. In its attention to civil
rights, the Fair Deal also reflected the growing role of
African Americans in the Democratic Party. Congress,
however,  remained  a  huge  stumbling  block,  and  the
Fair Deal fared poorly. The same conservative coalition
that  had  blocked  Roosevelt’s  initiatives  in  his  second
term continued the fight against Truman’s. Cold War
pressure  shaped  political  arguments  about  domestic
social  programs,  while  the  nation’s  growing  paranoia
over  internal  subversion  weakened  support  for  bold
extensions of the welfare state. Truman’s proposal for
national health insurance, for instance, was a popular
idea, with strong backing from organized labor. But it
was denounced as “socialized medicine” by the Amer-
ican Medical Association and the insurance industry.
In  the  end,  the  Fair  Deal’s  only  significant  break-
through,  other  than  improvements  to  the  minimum
wage  and  Social  Security,  was  the  National  Housing
Act  of  1949,  which  authorized  the  construction  of
810,000 low-income units.

Red Scare: The Hunt for Communists
Cold War liberalism was premised on the grave domes-
tic  threat  posed,  many  believed,  by  Communists  and
Communist  sympathizers.  Was  there  any  significant
Soviet  penetration  of  the  American  government?
Records  opened  after  the  1991  disintegration  of  the
Soviet Union indicate that there was, although it was
largely confined to the 1930s. Among American sup-
pliers of information to Moscow were FDR’s assistant
secretary  of  the  treasury,  Harry  Dexter  White;  FDR’s
administrative  aide  Laughlin  Currie;  a  strategically
placed  midlevel  group  in  the  State  Department;  and
several  hundred  more,  some  identified  only  by  code
name, working in a range of government departments
and agencies.

How are we to explain this? Many of these enlist-
ees  in  the  Soviet  cause  had  been  bright  young  New
Deal ers  in  the  mid-1930s,  when  the  Soviet-backed
Popular Front suggested that the lines separating lib-
eralism,  progressivism, and communism were perme-
able (Chap ter 24). At that time, the United States was
not at war and never expected to be. And when war
did come, the Soviet Union was an American ally. For
critics  of  the  informants,  however,  there  remained
the  time  between  the  Nazi-Soviet  Pact  and  the  Ger-
man invasion of the Soviet Union, a nearly two-year
period  during  which  cooperation  with  the  Soviet
Union could be seen in a less positive light. Moreover,

