passing  secrets  to  another  country,  even  a  wartime
ally,  was  simply  indefensible  to  many  Americans.
The  lines  between  U.S.  and  Soviet  interests  blurred
for some; for others, they remained clear and definite.
After  World  War  II,  however,  most  suppliers  of
information  to  the  Soviets  apparently  ceased  spying.
For one thing, the professional apparatus of Soviet spy-
ing in the United States was dismantled or disrupted by
American counterintelligence work. For another, most
of the well-connected amateur spies moved on to other
careers. Historians have thus developed a healthy skep-
ticism  that  there  was  much  Soviet  espionage  in  the
United  States  after  1947,  but  this  was  not  how  many
Americans  saw  it  at  the  time.  Legitimate  suspicions
and real fears, along with political opportunism, com-
bined to fuel the national Red Scare, which was longer
and  more  far-reaching  than  the  one  that  followed
World War I (Chapter 22).

Loyalty-Security Program  To insulate his adminis-
tration  against  charges  of  Communist  infiltration,
Truman  issued  Executive  Order  9835  on  March  21,
1947, which created the Loyalty-Security Program. The
order permitted officials to investigate any employee of
the federal government (some 2.5 million people) for
“subversive” activities. Representing a profound central-
ization of power, the order sent shock waves through
every  federal  agency.  Truman  intended  the  order  to
apply  principally  to  actions  designed  to  harm  the
United States (sabotage, treason, etc.), but it was broad
enough to allow anyone to be accused of subversion for
the slightest reason — for marching in a Communist-
led demonstration in the 1930s, for instance, or sign-
ing  a  petition  calling  for  public  housing.  Along  with
suspected political subversives, more than a thousand
gay  men  and  lesbians  were  dismissed  from  federal
employment  in  the  1950s,  victims  of  an  obsessive
search for anyone deemed “unfit” for government work.
Following Truman’s lead, many state and local gov-
ernments, universities, political organizations, churches,
and  businesses  undertook  their  own  antisubversion
campaigns, which often included loyalty oaths. In the
labor  movement,  charges  of  Communist  domination
led  to  the  expulsion  of  a  number  of  unions  by  the
Congress  of  Industrial  Organizations  (CIO)  in  1949.
Civil rights organizations such as the National Assoc-
iation for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)
and the National Urban League also expelled Commu-
nists  and  “fellow  travelers,”  or  Communist  sympa-
thizers.  Thus  the  Red  Scare  spread  from  the  federal
government to the farthest reaches of American orga-
nizational, economic, and cultural life.

CHAPTER 25

  Cold War America, 1945–1963

821

HUAC  The  Truman  administration  had  legitimized
the vague and malleable concept of “disloyalty.” Others
proved  willing  to  stretch  the  concept  even  further,
beginning with the House Un- American Activities Com-
mittee (HUAC), which Congressman Martin Dies of
Texas and other conservatives had launched in 1938.
After the war, HUAC helped spark the Red Scare by
holding widely publicized hearings in 1947 on alleged
Com mun ist  infiltration  in  the  movie  industry.  A
group of writers and directors dubbed the Hollywood
Ten  went  to  jail  for  contempt  of  Congress  after  they
refused to testify about their past associations. Hun-
dreds  of  other  actors,  directors,  and  writers  whose
names had been mentioned in the HUAC investigation
were  unable  to  get  work,  victims  of  an  unacknowl-
edged  but  very  real  blacklist  honored  by  industry
executives.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors led to the
postwar Red Scare, and
what were its ramiﬁcations
for civil liberties in the
United States?

Other HUAC investigations had greater legitimacy.
One  that  intensified  the  anticommunist  crusade  in
1948  involved  Alger  Hiss,  a  former  New  Dealer  and
State  Department  official  who  had  accompanied
Franklin  Roosevelt  to  Yalta.  A
former  Communist,  Whitaker
Chambers, claimed that Hiss was
a member of a secret Communist
cell  operating  in  the  government
and  had  passed  him  classified
documents  in  the  1930s.  Hiss
denied  the  allegations,  but  Cali-
fornia  Repub lican  congressman  Richard  Nixon  dog-
gedly pursued the case against him. In early 1950, Hiss
was found guilty not of spying but of lying to Congress
about his Communist affiliations and was sentenced to
five years in federal prison. Many Americans doubted
at the time that Hiss was a spy. But the Venona tran-
scripts  in  the  1990s  corroborated  a  great  deal  of
Chambers’s testimony, and though no definitive proof
has  emerged,  many  historians  now  recognize  the
strong circumstantial evidence against Hiss.

McCarthyism  The meteoric career of Senator Joseph
McCarthy of Wisconsin marked first the apex and then
the finale of the Red Scare. In February 1950, McCarthy
delivered  a  bombshell  during  a  speech  in  Wheeling,
West Virginia: “I have here in my hand a list of 205 . . . a
list of names that were made known to the Secretary of
State  as  being  members  of  the  Communist  Party  and
who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in
the State Department.” McCarthy later reduced his num-
bers,  gave  different  figures  in  different  speeches,  and
never released any names or proof. But he had gained
the attention he sought (American Voices, p. 822).

