A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Hunting Communists

and Liberals

The onset of the Cold War created an opportunity for some conservatives to use
anticommunism  as  a  weapon  to  attack  the  Truman  administration.  In  Senator
Joseph McCarthy’s case, the charge was that the U.S. government was harboring
Soviet  spies.  There  was  also  a  broader,  more  amorphous  attack  on  people
accused not of spying but of having communist sympathies; such “fellow travel-
ers” were considered “security risks” and thus unsuitable for government posi-
tions. The basis of suspicion for this targeted group was generally membership
in organizations that supported policies that either overlapped with or seemed
similar to policies supported by the Communist Party.

Senator Joseph McCarthy
Speech Delivered in Wheeling, West
Virginia, February 9, 1950

Though  Senator  McCarthy  was  actually  late  getting  on
board the anticommunist rocket ship, this was the speech
that  launched  him  into  orbit.  No  one  else  ever  saw  the
piece  of  paper  he  waved  about  during  this  speech  with
the names of 57 spies in the State Department. Over time,
the numbers he cited ﬂuctuated (in early versions of this
speech he claimed to have a list of 205 names) and never
materialized into a single indictment for espionage. Still,
McCarthy  had  an  extraordinary  talent  for  whipping  up
anticommunist hysteria. His downfall came in 1954, when
the  U.S.  Senate  formally  censured  him  for  his  conduct;
three  years  later,  he  died  of  alcoholism  at  the  age  of
forty-eight.

Today we are engaged in a final, all-out battle between
communistic atheism and Christianity. The modern
champions of communism have selected this as the time.
And, ladies and gentlemen, the chips are down — they are
truly down. . . .

The reason why we find ourselves in a position of
impotency is not because our only powerful potential
enemy has sent men to invade our shores, but rather
because of the traitorous actions of those who have been
treated so well by this Nation. It has not been the less for-
tunate or members of minority groups who have been
selling this Nation out, but rather those who have had all
the benefits that the wealthiest nation on earth has had to
offer — the finest homes, the finest college education, and
the finest jobs in Government we can give. . . .

I have in my hand 57 cases of individuals who would

appear to be either card carrying members or certainly
loyal to the Communist Party, but who nevertheless are
still helping to shape our foreign policy.

Fulton Lewis Jr.
Radio Address, January 13, 1949

The  groundwork  for  McCarthy’s  anticommunist  crusade
was laid by the House Un-American Activities Committee
(HUAC), which had been formed in 1938 by conservative
southern  Democrats  seeking  to  investigate  alleged  com-
munist inﬂuence around the country. One of its early tar-
gets had been Dr. Frank P. Graham, the distinguished pres-
ident  of  the  University  of  North  Carolina.  A  committed
southern  liberal,  Graham  was  a  leading  ﬁgure  in  the
Southern Conference on Human Welfare, the most promi-
nent southern organization supporting the New Deal, free
speech,  organized  labor,  and  greater  rights  for  southern
blacks — causes  that  some  in  the  South  saw  as  pathways
for  communist  subversion.  After  the  war,  HUAC  stepped
up its activities and kept a close eye on Graham. Among
Graham’s duties was to serve as the head of the Oak Ridge
Institute  of  Nuclear  Studies,  a  consortium  of  fourteen
southern universities designed to undertake joint research
with  the  federal  government’s  atomic  energy  facility  at
Oak Ridge, Tennessee. To enable him to carry on his duties,
the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  (AEC)  granted  Graham  a
security clearance, overriding the negative recommenda-
tion  of  the  AEC’s  Security  Advisory  Board.  That  was  the
occasion for the following statement by Fulton Lewis Jr.,
a  conservative  radio  commentator  with  a  nationwide
following.

About Dr. Frank P. Graham, president of the University
of North Carolina, and the action of the Atomic Energy
Commission giving him complete clearance for all atomic
secrets despite the fact that the security officer of the
commission flatly rejected him. . . .

President Truman was asked to comment on the mat-
ter today at his press and radio conference, and his reply
was that he has complete confidence in Dr. Graham.

822

