. . . The defenders of Dr. Graham today offered
the apology that during the time he joined the various
subversive and Communist front organizations [like
the Southern Conference for Human Welfare] —
organizations so listed by the Attorney General of the
United States — this country was a co-belligerent with
Soviet Russia, and numerous people joined such groups
and causes. That argument is going to sound very thin
to most American citizens, because the overwhelming
majority of us would have no part of any Communist
or Communist front connections at any time.

Frank Porter Graham
Telegram to Fulton Lewis Jr., January 13,
1949

One can imagine Graham’s shock at hearing himself pillo-
ried  on  national  radio.  (He  had  not  even  been  aware  of
the AEC’s investigation of him.) The following is from his
response to Lewis.

In view of your questions and implications I hope you
will use my statement to provide for my answers. . . . I
have always been opposed to Communism and all totali-
tarian dictatorships. I opposed both Nazi and Communist
aggression against Czechoslovakia and the earlier Russian
aggression against Finland and later Communist aggres-
sion against other countries. . . .

During the period of my active participation, the
overwhelming number of members of the Southern
Conference were to my knowledge anti-Communists.
There were several isolationist stands of the Conference
with which I disagreed. The stands which I supported as
the main business of the Conference were such as the fol-
lowing: Federal aid to the states for schools; abolition of
freight rate discrimination against Southern commerce,
agriculture, and industry; anti–poll tax bill; anti-lynching
bill; equal right of qualified Negroes to vote in both pri-
maries and general elections; the unhampered lawful
right of labor to organize and bargain collectively in our
region; . . . minimum wages and social security in the
Southern and American tradition. . . .

I have been called a Communist by some sincere people.

I have been called a spokesman of American capitalism
by Communists and repeatedly called a tool of imperial-
ism by the radio from Moscow. I shall simply continue to
oppose Ku Kluxism, imperialism, fascism, and Commun-
ism whether in America . . . or behind the “iron curtain.”

House Un-American Activities Committee
Report on Frank Graham, February 4, 1949

Because  of  the  controversy,  HUAC  released  a  report  on
Graham.

A check of the files, records and publications of the
Committee on Un-American Activities has revealed the
following information: Letterheads dated September 22,
1939, January 17, 1940, and May 26, 1940, as well as the
“Daily Worker” of March 18, 1939, . . . reveal that Frank P.
Graham was a member of the American Committee for
Democracy and Intellectual Freedom. . . . In Report
2277, dated June 25, 1942, the Special Committee on
Un-American Activities found that “the line of the
American Committee for Democracy and Intellectual
Freedom has fluctuated in complete harmony with the
line of the Communist Party.” The organization was again
cited by the Special Committee . . . as a Communist front
“which defended Communist teachers.” . . .

A letterhead of February 7, 1946, a letterhead of June 4,
1947 . . . and an announcement of the Third Meeting, April
19–21, 1942, at Nashville, Tennessee, reveal that Frank P.
Graham was honorary President of the Southern Confer-
ence for Human Welfare. . . .

In a report on the Southern Conference for Human

Welfare, dated June 16, 1947, the Committee on Un-
American Activities found “the most conclusive proof
of Communist domination of the Southern Conference
for Human Welfare is to be found in the organization’s
strict and unvarying conformance to the line of the
Communist Party in the field of foreign policy. It is
also a clear indication of the fact that the real purpose
of the organization was not ‘human welfare’ in the South,
but rather to serve as a convenient vehicle in support of
the current Communist Party line.”

Source: # 1819 Frank Porter Graham Papers. Courtesy of the Southern Historical
Collection, Wilson Library, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  On what grounds did Fulton Lewis Jr. and HUAC assert
that Frank Graham was a security risk? Did they charge
that he was a Communist? Is there any evidence in these
documents that Graham might have been a security risk?
2.  How did Graham defend himself? Are you persuaded by

his argument?

3.  Compare McCarthy’s famous speech at Wheeling, West
Virginia, and the suspicions voiced against Graham by
Lewis and HUAC a year earlier. What similarities do
you see?

823

