824

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

For the next four years, from his position as chair
of the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investiga-
tions,  McCarthy  waged  a  virulent  smear  campaign.
Critics  who  disagreed  with  him  exposed  themselves
to  charges  of  being  “soft”  on  communism.  Truman
called McCarthy’s charges “slander, lies, [and] charac-
ter  assassination”  but  could  do  nothing  to  curb  him.
Republicans,  for  their  part,  refrained  from  publicly
challenging their most outspoken senator and, on the
whole,  were  content  to  reap  the  political  benefits.
McCarthy’s charges almost always targeted Democrats.
Despite McCarthy’s failure to identify a single Com-
munist in government, several national developments
gave  his  charges  credibility  with  the  public.  The  dra-
matic 1951 espionage trial of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg,
followed around the world, fueled McCarthy’s allega-
tions. Convicted of passing atomic secrets to the Soviet
Union,  the  Rosenbergs  were  executed  in  1953.  As  in

the  Hiss  case,  documents  released  decades  later  pro-
vided some evidence of Julius Rosenberg’s guilt, though
not  Ethel’s.  Their  execution  nevertheless  remains
controversial — in  part  because  some  felt  that  anti-
Semitism played a role in their sentencing. Also fueling
McCarthy’s charges were a series of trials of American
Communists  between  1949  and  1955  for  violation of
the 1940 Smith Act, which prohibited Americans from
advocating  the  violent  overthrow  of  the  government.
Though civil libertarians and two Supreme Court jus-
tices vigorously objected, dozens of Communist Party
members were convicted. McCarthy was not involved
in either the Rosenberg trial or the Smith Act convic-
tions, but these sensational events gave his wild charges
some credence.

In early 1954, McCarthy overreached by launching
an  investigation  into  subversive  activities  in  the  U.S.
Army. When lengthy hearings — the first of their kind

The Army-McCarthy Hearings

These 1954 hearings contributed to the downfall of Senator Joseph McCarthy by exposing his reckless
accusations and bullying tactics to the huge television audience that tuned in each day. Some of the most
heated exchanges took place between McCarthy (center) and Joseph Welch (seated, left), the lawyer
representing the army. When the gentlemanly Welch ﬁnally asked, “Have you no sense of decency sir,
at long last? Have you left no sense of decency?” he fatally punctured McCarthy’s armor. The audience
broke into applause because someone had ﬁnally had the courage to stand up to the senator from
Wisconsin. © Bettmann/Corbis.

