broadcast on the new medium of television — brought
McCarthy’s tactics into the nation’s living rooms, sup-
port for him plummeted. In December 1954, the Senate
voted 67 to 22 to censure McCarthy for unbecoming
conduct. He died from an alcohol-related illness three
years  later  at  the  age  of  forty-eight,  his  name  forever
attached to a period of political repression of which he
was only the most flagrant manifestation.

The Politics of Cold War Liberalism
As  election  day  1952  approached,  the  nation  was
embroiled in the tense Cold War with the Soviet Union
and fighting a “hot” war in Korea. Though Americans
gave the Republicans victory, radical change was not in
the offing. The new president, Dwight D. Eisenhower,
set  the  tone  for  what  his  supporters  called  modern
Republicanism, an updated GOP approach that aimed
at  moderating,  not  dismantling,  the  New  Deal  state.
Eisenhower and his supporters were more successors
of FDR than of Herbert Hoover. Foreign policy revealed
a  similar  continuity.  Like  their  predecessors,  Repub-
licans saw the world in Cold War polarities.

Republicans rallied around Eisenhower, the popu-
lar former commander of Allied forces in Europe, but
divisions  in  the  party  persisted.  More  conservative
party  activists  preferred  Robert  A.  Taft  of  Ohio,  the
Republican leader in the Senate who was a vehement
opponent of the New Deal. A close friend of business,
he particularly detested labor unions. Though an ardent
anticommunist, the isolationist-minded Taft criticized
Truman’s aggressive containment policy and opposed
U.S. participation in NATO. Taft ran for president three
times, and though he was never the Republican nomi-
nee, he won the loyalty of conservative Americans who
saw the welfare state as a waste and international affairs
as dangerous foreign entanglements.

In  contrast,  moderate  Republicans  looked  to
Eisenhower and even to more liberal-minded leaders
like  Nelson  Rockefeller,  who  supported  international
initiatives  such  as  the  Marshall  Plan  and  NATO  and
were  willing  to  tolerate  labor  unions  and  the  welfare
state. Eisenhower was a man without a political past.
Believing  that  democracy  required  the  military  to
stand aside, he had never voted. Rockefeller, the scion
of one of the richest families in America, was a Cold
War internationalist. He served in a variety of capaci-
ties under Eisenhower, including as an advisor on for-
eign affairs. Having made his political name, Rockefeller
was  elected  the  governor  of  New  York  in  1959  and
became  the  de  facto  leader  of  the  liberal  wing  of  the
Republican Party.

CHAPTER 25

  Cold War America, 1945–1963

825

Dwight Eisenhower

In this photo taken during the 1952 presidential campaign,
Dwight D. Eisenhower acknowledges cheers from support-
ers in Chicago. “Ike,” as he was universally known, had
been a popular ﬁve-star general in World War II (also
serving as Supreme Allied Commander in the European
theater) and turned to politics in the early 1950s as a
member of the Republican Party. However, Eisenhower
was a centrist who did little to disrupt the liberal social
policies that Democrats had pursued since the 1930s.
© Bettmann/Corbis.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
What were the components
of Cold War liberalism,
and why did the Demo-
cratic Party embrace them?

For eight years, between 1952
and  1960,  Eisenhower  steered
a  precarious  course  from  the
middle of the party, with conser-
vative  Taft  Republicans  on  one
side  and
liberal  Rockefeller
Repub licans  on  the  other.  His
popularity  temporarily  kept  the  two  sides  at  bay,
though  more  ardent  conservatives  considered  him  a
closet  New  Dealer.  “Ike,”  as  he  was  widely  known,
proved  willing  to  work  with  the  mostly  Democratic-
controlled  Congresses  of  those  years.  Eisenhower
signed bills increasing federal outlays for veterans’ ben-
efits, housing, highway construction (Chapter 26), and
Social Security, and he increased the minimum wage
from 75 cents an hour to $1. Like Truman, Eisenhower
accepted some government responsibility for the eco-
nomic security of individuals, part of a broad consen-
sus in American politics in these years.

