826

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

America  Under  Eisenhower  The  global  power
realities  that  had  called  forth  containment  guided
Eisenhower’s foreign policy. New developments, how-
ever, altered the tone of the Cold War. Stalin’s death in
March 1953 precipitated an intraparty struggle in the
Soviet  Union  that  lasted  until  1956,  when  Nikita
Khrushchev emerged as Stalin’s successor. Khrushchev
soon startled communists around the world by denounc-
ing  Stalin  and  detailing  his  crimes  and  blunders.  He
also surprised many Americans by calling for “peaceful
coexistence” with the West and by dealing more flexi-
bly with dissent in the Communist world. But the new
Soviet leader had his limits, and when Hungarians rose
up  in  1956  to  demand  independence  from  Moscow,
Khrushchev crushed the incipient revolution.

With no end to the Cold War in sight, Eisenhower
focused on limiting the cost of containment. The pres-
ident hoped to economize by relying on a nuclear arse-
nal and deemphasizing expensive conventional forces.
Under this “New Look” defense policy, the Eisenhower
administration stepped up production of the hydrogen
bomb  and  developed  long-range  bombing  capabili-
ties. The Soviets, however, matched the United States
weapon for weapon. By 1958, both nations had inter-
continental  ballistic  missiles.  When  an  American
nuclear submarine launched an atomic-tipped Polaris
missile in 1960, Soviet engineers raced to produce an
equivalent weapon. This arms race was another critical
feature of the Cold War. American officials believed the
best deterrent to Soviet aggression was the threat of an
all-out  nuclear  response  by  the  United  States,  which
was dubbed “massive retaliation” by Secretary of State
Dulles.

To see a longer excerpt of the Dulles document,
along with other primary sources from this period,
see Sources for America’s History.

Although  confident  in  the  international  arena,
Eisenhower started out as a novice in domestic affairs.
Doing his best to set a less confrontational tone after
the rancorous Truman years, he was reluctant to speak
out against Joe McCarthy, and he was not a leader on
civil rights. Democrats meanwhile maintained a strong
presence in Congress but proved weak in presidential
elections in the 1950s. In the two presidential contests
of  the  decade,  1952  and  1956,  Eisenhower  defeated
the  admired  but  politically  ineffectual  liberal  Adlai
Stevenson. In the 1952 election, Stevenson was ham-
pered  by  the  unpopularity  of  the  Truman  adminis-
tration.  The  deadlocked  Korean  War  and  a  series
of  scandals  that  Republicans  dubbed  “the  mess  in

Washington” combined to give the war-hero general an
easy victory. In 1956, Ike won an even more impressive
victory over Stevenson, an eloquent and sophisticated
spokesman for liberalism but no match for Eisenhower’s
popularity with the public.

During  Eisenhower’s  presidency,  new  political
forces on both the right and the left had begun to stir.
But they had not yet fully transformed the party system
itself. Particularly at the national level, Democrats and
Republicans  seemed  in  broad  agreement  about  the
realities of the Cold War and the demands of a mod-
ern,  industrial  economy  and  welfare  state.  Indeed,
respected  commentators  in  the  1950s  declared  “the
end  of  ideology”  and  wondered  if  the  great  political
clashes that had wracked the 1930s were gone forever.
Below  the  apparent  calm  of  national  party  politics,
however,  lay  profound  differences  among  Americans
over the direction of the nation. Those differences were
most pronounced regarding the civil rights of African
Americans.  But  a  host  of  other  issues  had  begun  to
emerge  as  controversial  subjects  that  would  soon
starkly divide the country and, in the 1960s, bring an
end to the brief and fragile Cold War consensus.

Containment in the
Postcolonial World
As  the  Cold  War  took  shape,  the  world  scene  was
changing at a furious pace. New nations were emerg-
ing across Asia, Africa, and the Middle East, created in
the wake of powerful anticolonial movements whose
origins  dated  to  before  World  War  II.  Between  1947
and  1962,  the  British,  French,  Dutch,  and  Belgian
empires all but disintegrated in a momentous collapse
of Euro pean global reach. FDR had favored the idea
of national self-determination, often to the fury of his
British and French allies. He expected emerging democ-
racies  to  be  new  partners  in  an  American-led,  free-
market  world  system.  But  colonial  revolts  produced
many  independent-  or  socialist-minded  regimes  in
the  so-called  Third  World,  as  well.  Third  World  was
a  term  that  came  into  usage  after  World  War  II  to
describe  developing  or  ex-colonial  nations  in  Asia,
Africa, Latin America, and the Middle East that were
not aligned with the Western capitalist countries led
by the United States or the socialist states of Eastern
Europe  led  by  the  Soviet  Union.  The  Truman  and
Eisenhower administrations often treated Third World
countries as pawns of the Soviet Union to be opposed
at all costs.

