828

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

secretary  of  state  Dulles  often  resorted  to  covert
operations  against  governments  that,  in  his  opinion,
were too closely aligned with the Soviets.

For these covert tasks, Dulles used the newly cre-
ated (1947) Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), run by
his brother, Allen Dulles. When Iran’s democratically
elected  nationalist  premier,  Mohammad  Mossadegh,
seized British oil properties in 1953, CIA agents helped
depose him and installed the young Mohammad Reza
Pahlavi as shah of Iran. Iranian resentment of the coup,
followed  by  twenty-five  years  of  U.S.  support  for  the
shah,  eventually  led  to  the  1979  Iranian  Revolution
(Chapter 30). In 1954, the CIA also engineered a coup
in Guatemala against the democratically elected presi-
dent,  Jacobo  Arbenz  Guzmán,  who  had  seized  land
owned by the American-owned United Fruit Company.
Arbenz offered to pay United Fruit the declared value
of  the  land,  but  the  company  rejected  the  offer  and
turned to the U.S. government. Eisenhower specifically
approved those CIA efforts and expanded the agency’s
mandate from gathering intelligence to intervening in
the affairs of sovereign states.

Vietnam  But  when  covert  operations  and  coups
failed or proved impractical, the American approach to
emerging nations could entangle the United States in
deeper,  more  intractable  conflicts.  One  example  was
already unfolding on a distant stage, in a small country
unknown  to  most  Americans:  Vietnam.  In  August
1945, at the close of World War II, the Japanese occupi-
ers of Vietnam surrendered to China in the north and
Britain  in  the  south.  The  Vietminh,  the  nationalist
movement that had led the resistance against the Jap-
anese (and the French, prior to 1940), seized control in
the north. But their leader, Ho Chi Minh, was a Com-
munist,  and  this  single  fact  outweighed  American
and British commitment to self-determination. When
France moved to restore its control over the country,
the United States and Britain sided with their European
ally.  President  Truman  rejected  Ho’s  plea  to  support
the  Vietnamese  struggle  for  nationhood,  and  France
rejected  Ho’s  offer  of  a  negotiated  independence.
Shortly after France returned, in late 1946, the Vietminh
resumed their war of national liberation.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
How did the Cold War
between the United States
and the Soviet Union
affect disparate regions
such as the Middle East
and Southeast Asia?

Eisenhower  picked  up  where
Truman  left  off.  If  the  French
failed,  Eisenhower  argued,  all
non-Communist governments in
the  region  would  fall  like  domi-
noes.  This
so-called  domino
theory — which  represented  an
extension  of  the  containment

doctrine — guided U.S. policy in Southeast Asia for the
next  twenty  years.  The  United  States  eventually  pro-
vided  most  of  the  financing  for  the  French  war,  but
money  was  not  enough  to  defeat  the  determined
Vietminh, who were fighting for the liberation of their
country.  After  a  fifty-six-day  siege  in  early  1954,  the
French were defeated at the huge fortress of Dien Bien
Phu. The result was the 1954 Geneva Accords, which
partitioned  Vietnam  temporarily  at  the  17th  parallel
and called for elections within two years to unify the
strife-torn nation.

The United States rejected the Geneva Accords and
set about undermining them. With the help of the CIA,
a  pro-American  government  took  power  in  South
Vietnam in June 1954. Ngo Dinh Diem, an anticom-
munist Catholic who had been residing in the United
States, returned to Vietnam as premier. The next year,
in a rigged election, Diem became president of an inde-
pendent South Vietnam. Facing certain defeat by the
popular Ho Chi Minh, Diem called off the scheduled
reunification elections. As the last French soldiers left
in March 1956, the Eisenhower administration propped
up Diem with an average of $200 million a year in aid
and  a  contingent  of  675  American  military  advisors.
This support was just the beginning.

The Middle East
If Vietnam was still of minor con-
cern, the same could not be said of the Middle East, an
area rich in oil and political complexity. The most vol-
atile  area  was  Palestine,  populated  by  Arabs  but  also
historically  the  ancient  land  of  Israel  and  coveted  by
the Zionist movement as a Jewish national homeland.
After World War II, many survivors of the Nazi exter-
mination camps resettled in Palestine, which was still
controlled  by  Britain  under  a  World  War  I  mandate.
On  November  29,  1947,  the  UN  General  Assembly
voted to partition Palestine between Jewish and Arab
sectors.  When  the  British  mandate  ended  in  1948,
Zionist leaders proclaimed the state of Israel. A coali-
tion  of  Arab  nations  known  as  the  Arab  League
invaded, but Israel survived. Many Palestinians fled or
were driven from their homes during the fighting. The
Arab defeat left these people permanently stranded in
refugee camps. President Truman recognized the new
state  immediately,  which  won  him  crucial  support
from Jewish voters in the 1948 election but alienated
the Arab world.

Southeast  of  Palestine,  Egypt  began  to  assert  its
presence  in  the  region.  Having  gained  independence
from Britain several decades earlier, Egypt remained a
monarchy until 1952, when Gamal Abdel Nasser led a
military coup that established a constitutional republic.

