The Suez Crisis, 1956

In this photograph, Egyptian
president Gamal Abdel Nasser
is greeted ecstatically by Cairo
crowds after he nationalized the
Suez Canal. Nasser’s gamble paid
off. Thanks to American intervention,
military action by Britain, France, and
Israel failed, and Nasser emerged
as the triumphant voice of Arab
nationalism across the Middle East.
The popular emotions he unleashed
against the West survived his death
in 1970 and are more potent today
than ever, although now expressed
more through Islamic fundamental-
ism than Nasser’s brand of secular
nationalism. Getty Images.

Caught  between  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  United
States,  Nasser  sought  an  independent  route:  a  pan-
Arab socialism designed to end the Middle East’s colo-
nial  relationship  with  the  West.  When  negotiations
with  the  United  States  over  Nasser’s  plan  to  build  a
massive hydroelectric dam on the Nile broke down in
1956,  he  nationalized  the  Suez  Canal,  which  was  the
lifeline for Western Europe’s oil. Britain and France, in
alliance  with  Israel,  attacked  Egypt  and  seized  the
canal.  Concerned  that  the  invasion  would  encourage
Egypt to turn to the Soviets for help, Eisenhower urged
France and Britain to pull back. He applied additional
pressure  through  the  UN  General  Assembly,  which
called  for  a  truce  and  troop  withdrawal.  When  the
Western  nations  backed  down,  however,  Egypt
reclaimed the Suez Canal and built the Aswan Dam on
the  Nile  with  Soviet  support.  Eisenhower  had  likely
avoided a larger war, but the West lost a potential ally
in Nasser.

In  early  1957,  concerned  about  Soviet  influence
in the Middle East, the president announced the Eisen-
hower  Doctrine,  which  stated  that  American  forces
would assist any nation in the region that required aid
“against overt armed aggression from any nation con-
trolled  by  International  Communism.”  Invoking  the
doctrine  later  that  year,  Eisenhower  helped  King
Hussein  of  Jordan  put  down  a  Nasser-backed  revolt
and  propped  up  a  pro-American  government  in

CHAPTER 25

  Cold War America, 1945–1963

829

Lebanon.  The  Eisenhower  Doctrine  was  further  evi-
dence that the United States had extended the global
reach of containment, in this instance accentuated by
the strategic need to protect the West’s access to steady
supplies of oil.

John F. Kennedy and the Cold War
Charisma,  style,  and  personality —  these,  more  than
platforms and issues, defined a new brand of politics in
the  early  1960s.  This  was  John  F.  Kennedy’s  natural
environment.  Kennedy,  a  Harvard  alumnus,  World
War  II  hero,  and  senator  from  Massa chusetts,  had
inherited  his  love  of  politics  from  his  grandfa-
thers — colorful,  and  often  ruthless,  Irish  Cath o lic
politicians in Boston. Ambitious and deeply aware of
style,  the  forty-three-year-old  Kennedy  made  use  of
his  many  advantages  to  become,  as  novelist  Norman
Mailer  put  it,  “our  leading  man.”  His  one  disadvan-
tage — that he was Catholic in a country that had never
elected  a  Catholic  president —
he  masterfully  neutralized.  And
thanks  to  both  media  advisors
and  his  youthful  attractiveness,
Kennedy projected a superb tele-
vision image.

At  heart,  however,  Kennedy
was  a  Cold  Warrior  who  had

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How was Kennedy’s
approach to the Cold War
similar to and different
from Eisenhower’s and
Truman’s?

