830

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

The Kennedy Magnetism

John F. Kennedy, the 1960 Democratic
candidate for president, used his youth
and personality (and those of his equally
personable and stylish wife) to attract
voters. Here the Massachusetts senator
draws an enthusiastic crowd on a
campaign stop in Elgin, Illinois. AP
Images.

come  of  age  in  the  shadow  of  Munich,  Yalta,  and
McCarthyism. He projected an air of idealism, but his
years in the Senate (1953–1960) had proved him to be
a conventional Cold War politician. Once elected pres-
ident, Kennedy would shape the nation’s foreign policy
by drawing both on his ingenuity and on old-style Cold
War power politics.

The  Election  of  1960  and  the  New  Frontier
Kennedy’s  Republican  opponent  in  the  1960  presi-
dential  election,  Eisenhower’s  vice  president,  Richard
Nixon,  was  a  seasoned  politician  and  Cold  Warrior
himself.  The  great  innovation  of  the  1960  campaign
was  a  series  of  four  nationally  televised  debates.
Nixon,  less  photogenic  than  Kennedy,  looked  sallow
and  unshaven  under  the  intense  studio  lights.  Voters
who heard the first debate on the radio concluded that
Nixon had won, but those who viewed it on television
favored  Kennedy.  Despite  the  edge  Kennedy  enjoyed
in the debates, he won only the narrowest of electoral
victories,  receiving  49.7  percent  of  the  popular  vote
to  Nixon’s  49.5  percent.  Kennedy  attracted  Catholics,
Afri can  Americans,  and  the  labor  vote;  his  vice-
presidential  running  mate,  Texas  senator  Lyndon
Baines Johnson, helped bring in southern Democrats.
Yet  only  120,000  votes  separated  the  two  candidates,
and a shift of a few thousand votes in key states would
have reversed the outcome.

Kennedy brought to Washington a cadre of young,
ambitious newcomers, including Robert McNamara, a

renowned  systems  analyst  and  former  head  of  Ford
Motor  Company,  as  secretary  of  defense.  A  host  of
trusted advisors and academics flocked to Washington
to  join  the  New  Frontier — Kennedy’s  term  for  the
challenges  the  country  faced.  Included  on  the  team
as  attorney  general  was  Kennedy’s  younger  brother
Robert, who had made a name as a hard-hitting inves-
tigator of organized crime. Relying on an old American
trope,  Kennedy’s  New  Frontier  suggested  masculine
toughness and adventurism and encouraged Americans
to  again  think  of  themselves  as  exploring  uncharted
terrain.  That  terrain  proved  treacherous,  however,  as
the new administration immediately faced a crisis.

Crises  in  Cuba  and  Berlin
In  January  1961,  the
Soviet  Union  announced  that  it  intended  to  support
“wars  of  national  liberation”  wherever  in  the  world
they  occurred.  Kennedy  took  Soviet  premier  Nikita
Khrushchev’s words as a challenge, especially as they
applied to Cuba, where in 1959 Fidel Castro had over-
thrown the right-wing dictator Fulgencio Batista and
declared  a  revolution.  Determined  to  keep  Cuba  out
of  the  Soviet  orbit,  Kennedy  followed  through  on
Eisenhower  administration  plans  to  dispatch  Cuban
exiles to foment an anti-Castro uprising. The invaders,
trained  by  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency,  were  ill-
prepared  for  their  task.  On  landing  at  Cuba’s  Bay  of
Pigs on April 17, 1961, the force of 1,400 was crushed
by  Castro’s  troops.  Kennedy  prudently  rejected  CIA
pleas  for  a  U.S.  air  strike.  Accepting  defeat,  Kennedy

