CHAPTER 25

  Cold War America, 1945–1963

831

went before the American people and took full respon-
sibility for the fiasco (Map 25.6).

Already strained by the Bay of Pigs incident, U.S.-
Soviet relations deteriorated further in June 1961 when
Khrushchev stopped movement between Communist-
controlled  East  Berlin  and  the  city’s  Western  sector.
Kennedy responded by dispatching 40,000 more troops
to Europe. In mid-August, to stop the exodus of East
Germans, the Communist regime began constructing
the Berlin Wall, policed by border guards under shoot-
to-kill orders. Until the 12-foot-high concrete barrier
came down in 1989, it served as the supreme symbol of
the Cold War.

A perilous Cold War confrontation came next, in
October 1962. In a somber televised address on Octo-
ber  22,  Kennedy  revealed  that  U.S.  reconnaissance

planes had spotted Soviet-built bases for intermediate-
range ballistic missiles in Cuba. Some of those weap-
ons had already been installed, and more were on the
way. Kennedy announced that the United States would
impose  a  “quarantine  on  all  offensive  military  equip-
ment” on its way to Cuba. As the world held its breath
waiting to see if the conflict would escalate into war, on
October 25, ships carrying Soviet missiles turned back.
After  a  week  of  tense  negotiations,  both  sides  made
concessions: Kennedy pledged not to invade Cuba, and
Khrushchev promised to dismantle the missile bases.
Kennedy  also  secretly  ordered  U.S.  missiles  to  be
removed from Turkey, at Khrushchev’s insistence. The
risk  of  nuclear  war,  greater  during  the  Cuban  missile
crisis than at any other time in the Cold War, prompted
a  slight  thaw  in  U.S.-Soviet  relations.  As  National

ARIZ.

NEW
MEXICO

OKLAHOMA

MO.

ARK.

KY.

TENN.

Dallas

TEXAS

LA.

San Antonio

MISS.

ALA.

GA.

VA.

N.C.

S.C.

Charleston

Savannah

Bermuda

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Houston

New Orleans

FLA.

Tampa

Orlando

M E X I C O

Gulf  of  Mexico

Key West

Havana

Miami

BAHAMAS

Bay of Pigs
April 17, 1961

CUBA

Guantánamo Bay

DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC

Puerto
Rico

San Juan

PACIFIC
OCEAN

GUATEMALA

BELIZE

HONDURAS

250

500 miles

EL SALVADOR

NICARAGUA

JAMAICA HAITI

VIRGIN IS.

C a r i b b e a n   S e a

TRINIDAD
& TOBAGO

Panama
Canal
Zone

COSTA
RICA

PANAMA

COLOMBI A

VEN EZUELA

0

0

250

500 kilometers

U.S. military sites

Bay of Pigs Invasion, 1961

Soviet missile sites in 1962

N

W

E

S

LESS

E
R
A
N
T
I
L
L
E
S

MAP 25.6
The United States and Cuba, 1961–1962

Fidel Castro’s 1959 Communist takeover of Cuba brought Cold War tensions to the Caribbean. In
1961, the United States tried unsuccessfully to overthrow Castro’s regime by sponsoring the Bay of
Pigs invasion of Cuban exiles launched from Nicaragua and other points in the Caribbean. In 1962,
the United States confronted the Soviet Union over Soviet construction of nuclear missile sites in
Cuba. After President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of the island, the Soviets backed down
from the tense standoff and removed the missiles. Despite the 1991 dissolution of the Soviet Union
and the ofﬁcial end of the Cold War, the United States continues to view Cuba, governed in 2012
by Raúl Castro, Fidel’s brother, as an enemy nation.

