832

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

The Berlin Wall

A West Berlin resident walks alongside a section of the Berlin Wall in August 1962, a year after its
construction. Note the two border guards on the East Berlin side, plus the numerous loudspeakers,
which East German Communists used to broadcast propaganda over the barricade that divided the
city. © Bettmann/Corbis.

Security  Advisor  McGeorge  Bundy  put  it,  both  sides
were chastened by “having come so close to the edge.”

Kennedy and the World  Kennedy also launched a
series  of  bold  nonmilitary  initiatives.  One  was  the
Peace Corps, which embodied a call to public service
put forth in his inaugural address (“Ask not what your
country can do for you, but what you can do for your
country”).  Thousands  of  men  and  women  agreed  to
devote  two  or  more  years  as  volunteers  for  projects
such as teaching English to Filipino schoolchildren or
helping African villagers obtain clean water. Exhibiting
the  idealism  of  the  early  1960s,  the  Peace  Corps  was
also  a  low-cost  Cold  War  weapon  intended  to  show
the developing world that there was an alternative to
communism. Kennedy championed space exploration,
as well. In a 1962 speech, he proposed that the nation
commit itself to landing a man on the moon within the
decade.  The  Soviets  had  already  beaten  the  United

States into space with the 1957 Sputnik satellite and the
1961 flight of cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin. Capitalizing on
America’s fascination with space, Kennedy persuaded
Congress  to  increase  funding  for  the  government’s
space  agency,  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space
Administration (NASA), enabling the United States to
pull  ahead  of  the  Soviet  Union.  Kennedy’s  ambition
was realized when U.S. astronauts arrived on the moon
in 1969.

Making a Commitment in Vietnam
Despite  slight  improvements,  U.S.-Soviet  relations
stayed  tense  and  containment  remained  the  corner-
stone of U.S. policy. When Kennedy became president,
he  inherited  Eisenhower’s  commitment  in  Vietnam.
Kennedy saw Vietnam in Cold War terms, but rather
than  practicing  brinksmanship — threatening  nuclear
war  to  stop  communism — Kennedy  sought  what  at

