CHAPTER 25

  Cold War America, 1945–1963

833

The Cuban Missile Crisis

During the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, President Kennedy meets with U.S. Army ofﬁcials. Over two tense
weeks, the world watched as the United States and the Soviet Union went to the brink of war when it
became known that Soviet military ofﬁcials had begun to construct nuclear weapons bases in Cuba, a
mere 90 miles from the southern tip of Florida. Kennedy’s threat to intercept Soviet missile shipments
with American naval vessels forced the Cold War adversary to back down. © Corbis.

the  time  seemed  a  more  intelligent  and  realistic
approach.  In  1961,  he  increased  military  aid  to  the
South  Vietnamese  and  expanded  the  role  of  U.S.
Special Forces (“Green Berets”), who would train the
South  Vietnamese  army  in  unconventional,  small-
group warfare tactics.

South  Vietnam’s  corrupt  and  repressive  Diem
regime, propped up by Eisenhower since 1954, was los-
ing ground in spite of American aid. By 1961, Diem’s
opponents,  with  backing  from  North  Vietnam,  had
formed  a  revolutionary  movement  known  as  the
National  Liberation  Front  (NLF).  NLF  guerrilla
forces — the  Vietcong — found  allies  among  peasants
alienated by Diem’s “strategic hamlet” program, which
had  uprooted  entire  villages  and  moved  villagers
into barbed-wire compounds. Furthermore, Buddhists
charged Diem, a Catholic, with religious persecution.
Starting  in  May  1963,  militant  Buddhists  staged
dramatic  demonstrations,  including  self-immolations
recorded  by  reporters  covering  the  activities  of  the
16,000 U.S. military personnel then in Vietnam.

These self-immolations, shown on television to an
uneasy global audience, powerfully illustrated the dilem-
mas of American policy in Vietnam. To ensure a stable

southern government and prevent victory for Ho Chi
Minh and the North, the United States had to support
Diem’s authoritarian regime. But the regime’s political
repression of its opponents made Diem more unpopu-
lar. He was assassinated on November 3, 1963. Whether
one supported U.S. involvement in Vietnam or not, the
elemental paradox remained unchanged: in its efforts
to win, the United States brought defeat ever closer.

SUMMARY
The Cold War began as a conflict between the United
States and the Soviet Union over Eastern Europe and
the  fate  of  post–World  War  II  Germany.  Early  in  the
conflict,  the  United  States  adopted  a  strategy  of  con-
tainment, which quickly expanded to Asia after China
became  a  communist  state  under  Mao  Zedong.  The
first effect of that expansion was the Korean War, after
which, under Dwight D. Eisenhower, containment of
communism  became  America’s  guiding  principle
across  the  developing  world — often  called  the  Third
World. Cold War tensions relaxed in the late 1950s but
erupted again under John F. Kennedy with the Cuban

