834

PART 8

  CHAPTER REVIEW

missile crisis, the building of the Berlin Wall, and major
increases  in  American  military  assistance  to  South
Vietnam. Cold War imperatives between 1945 and the
early 1960s meant a major military buildup, a massive
nuclear arms race, and unprecedented entanglements
across the globe.

On  the  domestic  front,  Harry  S.  Truman  started
out with high hopes for an expanded New Deal, only to
be  confounded  by  resistance  from  Congress  and  the
competing  demands  of  the  Cold  War.  The  greatest

Cold War–inspired development was a climate of fear
over internal subversion by Communists that gave rise
to  McCarthyism.  Truman’s  successor,  Eisenhower,
brought  the  Republicans  back  into  power.  Although
personally conservative, Eisenhower actually proved a
New  Dealer  in  disguise.  When  Eisenhower  left  office
and Kennedy became president, it seemed that a “lib-
eral consensus” prevailed, with old-fashioned, laissez-
faire  conservatism  mostly  marginalized  in  American
political life.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

Yalta Conference (p. 806)
United Nations (p. 807)
Potsdam Conference (p. 807)
containment (p. 808)
Truman Doctrine (p. 809)
Marshall Plan (p. 809)
North Atlantic Treaty

Organization (NATO) (p. 812)

Warsaw Pact (p. 812)
NSC-68 (p. 813)
Cold War liberalism (p. 818)
Taft-Hartley Act (p. 819)

Fair Deal (p. 820)
Loyalty-Security Program

(p. 821)

House Un-American Activities
Committee (HUAC) (p. 821)

“New Look” (p. 826)
domino theory (p. 828)
Eisenhower Doctrine (p. 829)
Bay of Pigs (p. 830)
Cuban missile crisis (p. 831)
Peace Corps (p. 832)

Key People

Joseph Stalin (p. 806)
George F. Kennan (p. 808)
Joseph McCarthy (p. 821)
Nikita Khrushchev (p. 826)
John F. Kennedy (p. 829)
Fidel Castro (p. 830)
Ho Chi Minh (p. 833)

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  What factors led to the Cold War?

2.  What was the domestic impact of the anticommu-

nist crusade of the late 1940s and 1950s?

3.  Why  did  the  United  States  become  involved  in

Vietnam?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events  listed  under  “Politics  and  Power”  and
“Identity” on the thematic timelines on pages 671
and  803.  Radicalism  played  a  significant  role  in
American  history  between  1890  and  1945.  What
radical politics took root in the United States dur-
ing  this  time,  and  how  did  the  government,  the
business  community,  and  different  social  groups
respond to that radicalism?

