CHAPTER 25

  CHAPTER REVIEW

835

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  How  was
America’s Cold War foreign policy an extension of
principles  and  policies  from  earlier  eras,  and  in
what ways was it a break with those traditions? Was
the Cold War inevitable? Why or why not?

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  Look  at  the  map  of  the
military-industrial complex (Map 25.3) on page 817

and  the  map  of  population  changes  (Chapter  26,
Map 26.2) on page 862. Where were the majority
of  military  weapons  manufactured?  What  were
the connections between weapons and geography?
How did those connections affect population dis-
tribution in the United States and within individual
metropolitan areas?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

John Lewis Gaddis, The Cold War: A New History
(2005), and Walter LaFeber, America, Russia, and the
Cold War, 1945–2006, 10th ed. (2008). Excellent
overviews of the Cold War from distinct perspectives.

John Earl Haynes and Harvey Klehr, Venona: Decod-
ing Soviet Espionage in America (1999). A thoughtful
analysis of Soviet espionage.

W. J. Rorabaugh, Kennedy and the Promise of the
Sixties (2002). A good starting point for Kennedy’s
presidency.

Ellen Schrecker, Many Are the Crimes: McCarthyism
in America (1998). An excellent, detailed account of
the McCarthy period.

The Center for the Study of the Pacific Northwest’s
site, “The Cold War and Red Scare in Washington
State,” at washington.edu/uwired/outreach/cspn
/Website/Classroom Materials/Curriculum Packets
/Cold War & Red Scare/Cold War and Red Scare
.html, provides detailed information on how the Red
Scare operated in one state.

The Woodrow Wilson International Center has
established the Cold War International History
Project at wilsoncenter.org/cwihp.

