Triumph of the Middle Class
1945–1963

At  the  height  of  the  Cold  War,  in

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
Why  did  consumer  culture  become
such  a  fixture  of  American  life  in
the postwar decades, and how did it
affect politics and society?

1959,  U.S.  vice  president  Richard
Nixon  debated  Soviet  premier
Nikita Khrushchev on the merits of Pepsi-
Cola, TV dinners, and electric ovens. Face-
to-face  at  the  opening  of  an  American
exhibition in Moscow, Nixon and Khrushchev strolled through a model American home,
assembled to demonstrate the consumer products available to the typical citizen of the
United  States.  Nixon  explained  to  Khrushchev  that  although  the  Soviet  Union  may
have had superior rockets, the United States was ahead in other areas, such as color
television.

This was Cold War politics by other means — a symbolic contest over which coun-
try’s  standard  of  living  was  higher.  What  was  so  striking  about  the  so-called  kitchen
debate was Nixon’s insistence, to a disbelieving Khrushchev, that a modern home ﬁlled
with  shiny  new  toasters,  televisions,  and  other  consumer  products  was  accessible  to
the average American worker. “Any steelworker could buy this house,” Nixon told the
Soviet  leader.  The  kitchen  debate  settled  little  in  the  geopolitical  rivalry  between  the
United States and the Soviet Union. But it speaks to us across the decades because it
reveals how Americans had come to see themselves by the late 1950s: as home owners
and consumers, as a people for whom the middle-class American Dream was a com-
mercial aspiration.

The real story of the postwar period was the growing number of Americans who
embraced  that  aspiration.  In  the  two  decades  following  the  end  of  World  War  II,  a
new middle class was born in the United States. Fortune magazine estimated that in
the 1950s, the middle class — which Fortune deﬁned as families with more than $5,000
in annual earnings after taxes (about $40,000 today) — was increasing at the rate of
1.1 million people per year. Riding a wave of rising incomes, American dominance in the
global economy, and Cold War federal spending, the postwar middle class enjoyed the
highest standard of living in the world.

However, the success of the middle class could not hide deeper troubles. This was
an era of neither universal conformity nor diminishing social strife. Jim Crow laws, con-
tradictions in women’s lives, a rebellious youth culture, and changing sexual mores were
only the most obvious sources of social tension. Suburban growth came at the expense
of cities, hastening urban decay and exacerbating racial segregation. Nor was prosperity
ever as widespread as the Moscow exhibit implied. The suburban lifestyle was beyond
the reach of the working poor, the elderly, immigrants, Mexican Americans, and most
African Americans — indeed, the majority of the country.

26

C H A P T E R

POSTWAR PROSPERITY
AND THE AFFLUENT
SOCIETY

Economy: From Recovery

to Dominance

A Nation of Consumers

Youth Culture

Religion and the Middle Class

THE AMERICAN
FAMILY IN THE ERA
OF CONTAINMENT

The Baby Boom

Women, Work, and Family

Challenging Middle-Class

Morality

A SUBURBAN NATION
The Postwar Housing Boom

Rise of the Sunbelt

Two Nations: Urban and

Suburban

838

