840

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Postwar Prosperity and the
Affluent Society
The United States enjoyed enormous economic advan-
tages at the close of World War II. While the Europeans
and  Japanese  were  still  clearing  the  war’s  rubble,
America stood poised to enter a postwar boom. As the
only  major  industrial  nation  not  devastated  by  war,
the United States held an unprecedented global posi-
tion. The American economy also benefitted from an
expanding  internal  market  and  heavy  investment  in
research  and  development.  Two  additional  develop-
ments stood out: First, for the first time in the nation’s
history,  employers  generally  accepted  collective  bar-
gaining, which for workers translated into rising wages,
expanding  benefits,  and  an  increasing  rate  of  home
ownership.  Second,  the  federal  government’s  outlays
for military and domestic programs gave a huge boost
to the economy.

Economy: From Recovery
to Dominance
U.S. corporations, banks, and manufacturers so domi-
nated the global economy that the postwar period has
been called the Pax Americana (a Latin term meaning
“American Peace” and harking back to the Pax Romana
of  the  first  and  second  centuries  a.d.).  Life  magazine
publisher Henry Luce was so confident in the nation’s
growing power that during World War II he had pre-
dicted  the  dawning  of  the  “American  century.”  The
preponderance  of  American  economic  power  in  the

postwar decades, however, was not simply an artifact of
the world war — it was not an inevitable development.
Several  key  elements  came  together,  internationally
and at home, to propel three decades of unprecedented
economic growth.

The  Bretton  Woods  System  American  global
supremacy rested partly on the economic institutions
created  at  an  international  conference  in  Bretton
Woods, New Hampshire, in July 1944. The first of those
institutions  was  the  World  Bank,  created  to  provide
loans for the reconstruction of war-torn Europe as well
as for the development of former colonized nations —
the  so-called  Third  World  or  developing  world.  A
second  institution,  the  International  Monetary  Fund
(IMF), was set up to stabilize currencies and provide a
predictable monetary environment for trade, with the
U.S. dollar serving as the benchmark. The World Bank
and  the  IMF  formed  the  cornerstones  of  the  Bretton
Woods system, which guided the global economy after
the war.

The Bretton Woods system was joined in 1947 by
the  first  General  Agreement  on  Tariffs  and  Trade
(GATT),  which  established  an  international  frame-
work for overseeing trade rules and practices. Together,
the Bretton Woods system and GATT served America’s
conception  of  an  open-market  global  economy  and
complemented the nation’s ambitious diplomatic aims
in the Cold War. The chief idea of the Bretton Woods
system  was  to  make  American  capital  available,  on
cheap terms, to nations that adopted free-trade capital-
ist  economies.  Critics  charged,  rightly,  that  Bretton
Woods  and  GATT  favored  the  United  States  at  the

The Kitchen Debate

At the American National Exhibition in
Moscow in 1959, the United States put
on display the technological wonders of
American home life. When Vice President
Richard Nixon visited, he and Soviet pre-
mier Nikita Khrushchev got into a heated
debate over the relative merits of their
rival systems, with the up-to-date Ameri-
can kitchen as a case in point. This
photograph shows the debate in
progress. Khrushchev is the bald man
pointing his ﬁnger at Nixon. To Nixon’s
left stands Leonid Brezhnev, who would
be Khrushchev’s successor. Getty Images.

