CHAPTER 26

  Triumph of the Middle Class, 1945–1963

841

expense  of  recently  independent  countries,  because
the  United  States  could  dictate  lending  terms  and
stood to benefit as nations purchased more American
goods.  But  the  system  provided  needed  economic
stability.

The Military-Industrial Complex  A second engine
of postwar prosperity was defense spending. In his final
address  to  the  nation  in  1961,  President  Dwight  D.
Eisenhower spoke about the power of what he called
the military-industrial complex, which by then employed
3.5 million Americans. Even though his administration
had  fostered  this  defense  establishment,  Eisenhower
feared  its  implications:  “We  must  guard  against  the
acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought
or  unsought,  by  the  military-industrial  complex,”  he
said.  This  complex  had  its  roots  in  the  business-
government partnerships of World War II. After 1945,
though  the  country  was  nominally  at  peace,  the

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What primary factors
led to the growth of the
American economy after
World War II?

economy  and  the  government
operated  in  a  state  of  perpetual
readiness for war.

Based  at  the  sprawling  Pen–
ta gon  in  Arlington,  Virginia,  the
Defense Department evolved into
a massive bureaucracy. In the name of national secu-
rity, defense-related industries entered into long-term
relationships with the Pentagon. Some companies did
so  much  business  with  the  government  that  they  in
effect became private divisions of the Defense Depart-
ment.  Over  60  percent  of  the  income  of  Boeing,
General Dynamics, and Raytheon, for instance, came
from military contracts, and the percentages were even
higher for Lockheed and Republic Aviation. In previ-
ous peacetime years, military spending had constituted
only 1 percent of gross domestic product (GDP); now it
represented 10 percent. Economic growth was increas-
ingly dependent on a robust defense sector.

The Military-Industrial Complex

Often, technology developed for military purposes, such as the complex design of jet airplanes, was easily
transferred to the consumer market. The Boeing Aircraft Company — their Seattle plant is pictured here in
the mid-1950s — became one of the leading commercial airplane manufacturers in the world in the 1960s,
boosted in part by tax dollar–ﬁnanced military contracts. Major American corporations — such as Boeing,
McDonnell Douglas, General Electric, General Dynamics, and dozens of others — beneﬁtted enormously
from military contracts from the Department of Defense in the years after World War II. © Bettmann/Corbis.

