842

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

As  permanent  mobilization  took  hold,  science,
industry,  and  government  became  intertwined.  Cold
War competition for military supremacy spawned both
an arms race and a space race as the United States and
the Soviet Union each sought to develop more explo-
sive bombs and more powerful rockets. Federal spend-
ing underwrote 90 percent of the cost of research for
aviation and space, 65 percent for electricity and elec-
tronics, 42 percent for scientific instruments, and even
24 percent for automobiles. With the government foot-
ing the bill, corporations lost little time in transform-
ing  new  technology  into  useful  products.  Backed  by
the  Pentagon,  for  instance,  IBM  and  Sperry  Rand
pressed  ahead  with  research  on  integrated  circuits,
which later spawned the computer revolution.

When the Soviet Union launched the world’s first
satellite,  Sputnik,  in  1957,  the  startled  United  States
went into high gear to catch up in the Cold War space
competition. Alarmed that the United States was fall-
ing  behind  in  science  and  technology,  Eisenhower
persuaded Congress to appropriate additional money
for  college  scholarships  and  university  research.  The
National  Defense  Education  Act  of  1958  funneled
millions of dollars into American universities, helping
institutions  such  as  the  University  of  California  at
Berkeley, Stanford University, the Massachusetts Insti-
tute  of  Technology,  and  the  University  of  Michigan
become the leading research centers in the world.

Corporate  Power  Despite  its  massive  size,  the
military-corporate partnership was only one part of the
nation’s economy. For over half a century, the consoli-
dation  of  economic  power  into  large  corporate  firms
had characterized American capitalism. In the postwar
decades,  that  tendency  accelerated.  By  1970,  the  top
four U.S. automakers produced 91 percent of all motor
vehicles sold in the country; the top four firms in tires
produced  72  percent;  those  in  cigarettes,  84  percent;
and those in detergents, 70 percent. Eric Johnston, for-
mer president of the American Chamber of Commerce,
declared that “we have entered a period of accelerating
bigness in all aspects of American life.” Expansion into
foreign markets also spurred corporate growth. During
the  1950s,  U.S.  exports  nearly  doubled,  giving  the
nation a trade surplus of close to $5 billion in 1960. By
the 1970s, such firms as Coca-Cola, Gillette, IBM, and
Mobil made more than half their profits abroad.

To staff their bureaucracies, the postwar corporate
giants required a huge white-collar army. A new gener-
ation  of  corporate  chieftains  emerged,  operating  in  a
complex environment that demanded long-range fore-
casting.  Companies  turned  to  the  universities,  which

grew explosively after 1945. Postwar corporate culture
inspired numerous critics, who argued that the obedi-
ence  demanded  of  white-collar  workers  was  stifling
creativity  and  blighting  lives.  In  The  Lonely  Crowd
(1950), the sociologist David Riesman mourned a lost
masculinity and contrasted the independent business-
men and professionals of earlier years with the mana-
gerial  class  of  the  postwar  world.  The  sociologist
William Whyte painted a somber picture of “organiza-
tion  men”  who  left  the  home  “spiritually  as  well  as
physically to take the vows of organization life.” Andrew
Hacker, in The Corporation Take-Over (1964), warned
that  a  small  handful  of  such  organization  men  “can
draw up an investment program calling for the expen-
diture of several billions of dollars” and thereby “deter-
mine  the  quality  of  life  for  substantial  segments  of
society.”

Many  of  these  “investment  programs”  relied  on
mechanization,  or  automation — another  important
factor in the postwar boom. From 1947 to 1975, worker
productivity  more  than  doubled  across  the  whole  of
the economy. American factories replaced manpower
with  machines,  substituting  cheap  fossil  energy  for
human muscle. As industries mechanized, they could
turn  out  products  more  efficiently  and  at  lower  cost.
Mechanization did not come without social costs, how-
ever. Over the course of the postwar decades, millions
of high-wage manufacturing jobs were lost as machines
replaced  workers,  affecting  entire  cities  and  regions.
Corporate  leaders  approved,  but  workers  and  their
union representatives were less enthusiastic. “How are
you going to sell cars to all of these machines?” won-
dered  Walter  Reuther,  president  of  the  United  Auto
Workers (UAW).

The  Economic  Record  The  American  economy
produced  an  extraordinary  postwar  record.  Annual
GDP jumped from $213 billion in 1945 to more than
$500  billion  in  1960;  by  1970,  it  exceeded  $1  trillion
(Figure 26.1). This sustained economic growth meant a
25 percent rise in real income for ordinary Americans
between 1946 and 1959. Even better, the new prosper-
ity featured low inflation. After a burst of high prices
in the immediate postwar period, inflation slowed to
2  to  3  percent  annually,  and  it  stayed  low  until  the
escalation  of  the  Vietnam  War  in  the  mid-1960s.
Feeling secure about the future, Americans were eager
to spend and rightly felt that they were better off than
ever before. In 1940, 43 percent of American families
owned  their  homes;  by  1960,  62  percent  did.  In  that
period, moreover, income inequality dropped sharply.
The share of total income going to the top tenth — the

