CHAPTER 26

  Triumph of the Middle Class, 1945–1963

843

1,500

1,000

500

s
n
o
i
l
l
i

B
$

GDP in constant (1972) dollars

0

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

GDP

FIGURE 26.1
Gross Domestic Product, 1930–1972

After a sharp dip during the Great Depression, the GDP
rose steadily in both real and constant dollars in the
postwar period.

richest  Americans — declined  by  nearly  one-third
from  the  45  percent  it  had  been  in  1940.  American
society had become not only more prosperous but also
more egalitarian.

However, the picture was not as rosy at the bottom,
where  tenacious  poverty  accompanied  the  economic
boom. In The Afﬂuent Society (1958), which analyzed
the nation’s successful, “affluent” middle class, econo-
mist  John  Kenneth  Galbraith  argued  that  the  poor
were only an “afterthought” in the minds of economists
and politicians, who largely celebrated the new growth.
As Galbraith noted, one in thirteen families at the time
earned less than $1,000 a year (about $7,500 in today’s
dollars). Four years later, in The Other America (1962),
the  left-wing  social  critic  Michael  Harrington  chron-
icled “the economic underworld of American life,” and
a  U.S.  government  study,  echoing  a  well-known  sen-
tence  from  Franklin  Roosevelt’s  second  inaugural
address (“I see one-third of a nation ill-housed, ill-clad,
ill-nourished”), declared “one-third of the nation” to be
poorly  paid,  poorly  educated,  and  poorly  housed.  It
appeared  that  in  economic  terms,  as  the  top  and  the
middle converged, the bottom remained far behind.

A Nation of Consumers
The  most  breathtaking  development  in  the  postwar
American economy was the dramatic expansion of the
domestic consumer market. The sheer quantity of con-
sumer goods available to the average person was with-
out precedent. In some respects, the postwar decades
seemed  like  the  1920s  all  over  again,  with  an  abun-
dance of new gadgets and appliances, a craze for auto-
mobiles,  and  new  types  of  mass  media.  Yet  there
was a significant difference: in the 1950s, consumption
became associated with citizenship. Buying things, once
a sign of personal indulgence, now meant participating

fully  in  American  society  and,  moreover,  fulfilling  a
social  responsibility.  What  the  suburban  family  con-
sumed, asserted Life magazine in a photo essay, would
help to ensure “full employment and improved living
standards for the rest of the nation.”

The GI Bill  The new ethic of consumption appealed
to the postwar middle class, the driving force behind
the  expanding  domestic  market.  Middle-class  status
was  more  accessible  than  ever  before  because  of  the
Servicemen’s  Readjustment  Act  of  1944,  popularly
known as the GI Bill. In the immediate postwar years,
more than half of all U.S. college students were veterans
attending  class  on  the  government’s  dime.  By  the
middle of the 1950s, 2.2 million veterans had attended
college  and  another  5.6  million  had  attended  trade
school with government financing. Before the GI Bill,
commented one veteran, “I looked upon college edu-
cation  as  likely  as  my  owning  a  Rolls-Royce  with  a
chauffeur.”

Government  financing  of  education  helped  make
the U.S. workforce the best educated in the world in the
1950s and 1960s. American colleges, universities, and
trade schools grew by leaps and bounds to accommo-
date the flood of students — and expanded again when
the  children  of  those  students,  the  baby  boomers,
reached college age in the 1960s. At Rutgers University,
enrollment went from 7,000 before the war to 16,000 in
1947;  at  the  University  of  Minnesota,  from  15,000  to
more than 27,000. The GI Bill trained nearly half a mil-
lion  engineers;  200,000  doctors,  dentists,  and  nurses;
and  150,000  scientists  (among  many  other  profes-
sions). Better education meant higher earning power,
and  higher  earning  power  translated  into  the  con-
sumer spending that drove the postwar economy. One
observer  of  the  GI  Bill  was  so  impressed  with  its
achievements  that  he  declared  it  responsible  for  “the
most important educational and social transformation
in American history.”

The GI Bill stimulated the economy and expanded
the  middle  class  in  another  way:  by  increasing  home
ownership.  Between  the  end  of  World  War  II  and
1966,  one  of  every  five  single-family  homes  built  in
the  United  States  was  financed  through  a  GI  Bill
mortgage — 2.5 million new homes in all. In cities and
suburbs across the country, the  Veterans  Administra-
tion (VA), which helped former soldiers purchase new
homes  with  no  down  payment,  sparked  a  building
boom  that  created  jobs  in  the  construction  industry
and fueled consumer spending in home appliances and
automobiles.  Education  and  home  ownership  were
more than personal triumphs for the families of World

