844

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

College on the GI Bill

In 1947 — the year this photo
was taken of a crowded lec-
ture hall at the University of
Iowa — more than 6,000 of
this university’s 10,000 stu-
dents (60 percent) were
veterans whose education
was ﬁnanced by the GI Bill.
Across the country, American
universities were bursting at the
seams from the massive enroll-
ment of World War II veterans.
Government ﬁnancing of college
education for these vets made
the U.S. workforce one of the
best educated in the world in
the 1950s and 1960s. Margaret
Bourke-White/Time Life Pictures/
Getty Images.

Motors, balked at that demand, the two sides seemed
set for a long struggle. Between 1947 and 1950, how-
ever,  a  broad  “labor-management  accord”  gradually

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

)

%

(

s
n
o
i
n
u
o
t
g
n
i
g
n
o
l
e
b
s
r
e
k
r
o
w

l
a
r
u
t
l
u
c
i
r
g
a
n
o
N

0
1900 ’10

’20

’30

’40

’50

’60

’70

’80

’90 ’97

FIGURE 26.2
Labor Union Strength, 1900–1997

Labor unions reached their peak strength immedi-
ately after World War II, when they represented
close to 40 percent of the nonfarm workforce.
Although there was some decline after the mid-
1950s, unions still represented nearly 30 percent
in 1973. Thereafter, their decline was precipitous.
AFL-CIO Information Bureau, Washington, DC.

War II veterans (and Korean and Vietnam War veter-
ans, after a new GI Bill was passed in 1952). They were
concrete financial assets that helped lift more Americans
than  ever  before  into  a  mass-consumption-oriented
middle class.

Trade  Unions  Organized  labor  also  expanded  the
ranks of the middle class. For the first time ever, trade
unions and collective bargaining became major factors
in  the  nation’s  economic  life.  In  the  past,  organized
labor  had  been  confined  to  a  narrow  band  of  craft
trades and a few industries, primarily coal mining, rail-
roading, and the building and metal trades. The power
balance  shifted  during  the  Great  Depression,  and  by
the  time  the  dust  settled  after  World  War  II,  labor
unions  overwhelmingly  represented  America’s  indus-
trial workforce (Figure 26.2). By the beginning of the
1950s,  the  nation’s  major  industries,  including  auto,
steel,  clothing,  chemicals,  and  virtually  all  consumer
product  manufacturing,  were  operating  with  union
contracts.

That outcome did not arrive without a fight. Unions
staged major strikes in nearly all American industries
in 1945 and 1946, and employers fought back. Head of
the  UAW  Walter  Reuther  and  CIO  president  Philip
Murray declared that employers could afford a 30 per-
cent  wage  increase,  which  would  fuel  postwar  con-
sumption. When employers, led by the giant General

