emerged  across  most  industries.  This  was  not  indus-
trial peace, because the country still experienced many
strikes, but a general acceptance of collective bargain-
ing as the method for setting the terms of employment.
The result was rising real income. The average worker
with three dependents gained 18 percent in spendable
real income in the 1950s.

In addition, unions delivered greater leisure (more
paid  holidays  and  longer  vacations)  and,  in  a  star-
tling departure, a social safety net. In postwar Europe,
America’s  allies  were  constructing  welfare  states.  But
having  lost  the  bruising  battle  in  Washington  for
national health care during Truman’s presidency, Amer-
i can unions turned to the bargaining table. By the end
of  the  1950s,  union  contracts  commonly  provided
pension  plans  and  company-paid  health  insurance.
Col lect ive  bargaining,  the  process  of  trade  unions
and  employers  negotiating  workplace  contracts,  had
become, in effect, the American alternative to the Euro-
pean  welfare  state  and,  as  Reuther  boasted,  the  pass-
port into the middle class.

The labor-management accord, though impressive,
was  never  as  durable  or  universal  as  it  seemed.  Vul-
nerabilities lurked. For one thing, the sheltered domes-
tic  markets — the  essential  condition  for  generous
contracts — were quite fragile. In certain industries, the
lead  firms  were  already  losing  market  share.  Second,
generally overlooked were the many unorganized work-
ers  with  no  middle-class  passport — those  consigned
to  unorganized  industries,  casual  labor,  or  low-wage
jobs in the service sector. A final vulnerability was the
most  basic:  the  abiding  antiunionism  of  American
employers.  At  heart,  managers  regarded  the  labor-
management  accord  as  a negotiated  truce,  not  a  per-
manent peace. The postwar labor-management accord
turned  out  to  be  a  transitory  event,  not  a  permanent
condition of American economic life.

Houses, Cars, and Children
Increased educational
levels, growing home ownership, and higher wages all
enabled more Americans than ever before to become
members of what one historian has called a “consumer
republic.” But what did they buy? The postwar empha-
sis on nuclear families and suburbs provides the answer.
In the emerging suburban nation, three elements came
together to create patterns of consumption that would
endure for decades: houses, cars, and children.

A  feature  in  a  1949  issue  of  McCall’s,  a  magazine
targeting middle-class women, illustrates the connec-
tions.  “I  now  have  three  working  centers,”  a  typical
housewife explains. “The baby center, a baking center
and  a  cleaning  center.”  Accom panying  illustrations

CHAPTER 26

  Triumph of the Middle Class, 1945–1963

845

reveal  the  interior  of  the  brand-new  house,  stocked
with the latest consumer products: accessories for the
baby’s room; a new stove, oven, and refrigerator; and a
washer  and  dryer,  along  with  cleaning  products  and
other household goods. The article does not mention
automobiles,  but  the  photo  of  the  house’s  exterior
makes the point clear: father drives home from work in
a new car.

Consumption  for  the  home,  including  automo-
biles, drove the postwar American economy as much
as, or more than, the military-industrial complex did.
If we think like advertisers and manufacturers, we can
see why. Between 1945 and 1970, more than 25 million
new  houses  were  built  in  the  United  States.  Each
required its own supply of new appliances, from refrig-
erators to lawn mowers. In 1955 alone, Americans pur-
chased 4 million new refrigerators, and between 1940
and  1951  the  sale  of  power  mowers  increased  from
35,000 per year to more than 1 million. Moreover, as
American industry discovered planned obsolescence —
the encouragement of consumers to replace appliances
and  cars  every  few  years — the
home  became  a  site  of  perpetual
consumer desire.

Children  also  encouraged
consumption. The  baby  boomers
born  between  World  War  II  and
the  late  1950s  have  consistently,
throughout  every  phase  of  their
lives,  been  the  darlings  of  American  advertising  and
consumption.  When  they  were  infants,  companies
focused  on  developing  new  baby  products,  from  dis-
posable  diapers  to  instant  formula.  When  they  were
toddlers and young children, new television programs,
board games, fast food, TV dinners, and thousands of
different  kinds  of  toys  came  to  market  to  supply  the
rambunctious youth. When they were teenagers, rock
music,  Hollywood  films,  and  a  constantly  marketed
“teen  culture” — with  its  appropriate  clothing,  music,
hairstyles,  and  other  accessories — bombarded  them.
Remarkably, in 1956, middle-class American teenagers
on  average  had  a  weekly  income  of  more  than  $10,
close to the weekly disposable income of an entire fam-
ily a generation earlier.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the tastes and
values of the postwar
middle class affect the
country?

Television  The emergence of commercial television
in  the  United  States  was  swift  and  overwhelming.  In
the realm of technology, only the automobile and the
personal  computer  were  its  equal  in  transforming
everyday  life  in  the  twentieth  century.  In  1947,  there
were 7,000 TV sets in American homes. A year later, the
CBS and NBC radio networks began offering regular

