846

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Teenagers

These teenage girls and boys are being restrained
by police outside an Elvis Presley concert in Florida
in 1956. Elvis, who was instrumental in popularizing
rock ’n’ roll music among white middle-class teenag-
ers in the mid-1950s, was one example of a broader
phenomenon: the creation of the “teenager” as a
distinct demographic, cultural category and, perhaps
most signiﬁcantly, consumer group. Beginning in the
1950s, middle-class teenagers had money to spend,
and advertisers and other entrepreneurs — such as
the music executives who marketed Elvis or the
Hollywood executives who invented the “teen
ﬁlm” — sought ways to win their allegiance and
their dollars. Photo by Charles Trainor/Time Life Pictures/
Getty Images.

programming, and by 1950 Americans owned 7.3 mil-
lion sets. Ten years later, 87 percent of American homes
had at  least one television set. Having conquered the
home,  television  would  soon  become  the  principal
mediator between the consumer and the marketplace.
Television advertisers mastered the art of manufac-
turing consumer desire. TV stations, like radio stations
before them, depended entirely on advertising for prof-
its.  The  first  television  executives  understood  that  as
long as they sold viewers to advertisers they would stay
on the air. Early corporate-sponsored shows (such as
General  Electric  Theater  and  U.S.  Steel  Hour)  and
simple  product  jingles  (such  as  “No  matter  what  the
time or place, let’s keep up with that happy pace. 7-Up
your thirst away!”) gave way by the early 1960s to slick
advertising campaigns that used popular music, movie
stars, sports figures, and stimulating graphics to capti-
vate viewers.

By  creating  powerful  visual  narratives  of  comfort
and  plenty,  television  revolutionized  advertising  and
changed forever the ways products were sold to Amer-
ican,  and  global,  consumers.  On  Queen  for  a  Day,  a

show popular in the mid-1950s, women competed to
see who could tell the most heartrending story of trag-
edy and loss. The winner was lavished with household
products: refrigerators, toasters, ovens, and the like. In
a groundbreaking advertisement for Anacin aspirin, a
tiny hammer pounded inside the skull of a headache
sufferer.  Almost  overnight,  sales  of  Anacin  increased
by 50 percent.

By  the  late  1950s,  what  Americans  saw  on  televi-
sion, both in the omnipresent commercials and in the
programming,  was  an  overwhelmingly  white,  Anglo-
Saxon, Protestant world of nuclear families, suburban
homes, and middle-class life. A typical show was Father
Knows  Best,  starring  Robert  Young  and  Jane  Wyatt.
Father  left  home  each  morning  wearing  a  suit  and
carrying a briefcase. Mother was a full-time housewife
and  stereotypical  female,  prone  to  bad  driving  and
tears.  Leave  It  to  Beaver,  another  immensely  popular
series  about  suburban  family  life,  embodied  similar
late-fifties themes. Earlier in the decade, however, tele-
vision  featured  grittier  realities.  The  Honeymooners,
starring Jackie Gleason as a Brooklyn bus driver, and

