CHAPTER 26

  Triumph of the Middle Class, 1945–1963

847

Advertising in the TV Age

Aggressive advertising of new products
such as the color television helped fuel
the surge in consumer spending during
the 1950s. Marketing experts empha-
sized television’s role in promoting
family togetherness, while interior
designers offered decorating tips that
placed the television at the focal point
of living rooms and the increasingly
popular “family rooms.” In this 1951
magazine advertisement, the family is
watching a variety program starring
singer Dinah Shore, who was the tele-
vision spokeswoman for Chevrolet cars.
Every American probably could hum the
tune of the little song she sang in praise
of the Chevy. Courtesy of Motorola Museum
© 1951 Motorola, Inc./Picture Research Consul-
tants & Archives.

The  Life  of  Riley,  a  situation  comedy  featuring  a
California aircraft worker, treated working-class lives.
Two other early-fifties television series, Beulah, starring
Ethel  Waters  and  then  Louise  Beavers  as  an  African
American maid, and the comedic Amos ’n’ Andy, were
the  only  shows  featuring  black  actors  in  major  roles.
Television  was  never  a  showcase  for  the  breadth  of
American society, but in the second half of the 1950s
broadcasting lost much of its ethnic, racial, and class
diversity and became a vehicle for the transmission of a
narrow range of middle-class tastes and values.

Youth Culture
One  of  the  most  striking  developments  in  American
life in the postwar decades was the emergence of the
teenager  as  a  cultural  phenomenon.  In  1956,  only

partly in jest, the CBS radio commentator Eric Sevareid
questioned  “whether  the  teenagers  will  take  over  the
United  States  lock,  stock,  living  room,  and  garage.”
Sevareid  was  grumbling  about  American  youth  cul-
ture, a phenomenon first noticed in the 1920s and with
its roots in the lengthening years of education, the role
of  peer  groups,  and  the  consumer  tastes  of  young
people. Market research revealed a distinct teen market
to be exploited. Newsweek noted with awe in 1951 that
the aggregate of the weekly spending money of teenag-
ers was enough to buy 190 million candy bars, 130 mil-
lion soft drinks, and 230 million sticks of gum. Increas-
ingly,  advertisers  targeted  the  young,  both  to  capture
their spending money and to exploit their influence on
family purchases.

Hollywood movies played a large role in fostering a
teenage  culture.  Young  people  made  up  the  largest

