848

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
How did rebellion become
an integral part of con-
sumer culture in the
postwar period?

audience for motion pictures, and
Hollywood  studios  learned  over
the  course  of  the  1950s  to  cater
to  them.  The  success  of  films
such as The Wild One (1953), star-
ring  Marlon  Brando;  Blackboard
Jungle (1955), with Sidney Poitier;
and  Rebel  Without  a  Cause  (1955),  starring  James
Dean, convinced movie executives that films directed
at teenagers were worthy investments. “What are you
rebelling  against?”  Brando  is  asked  in The  Wild  One.
“Whattaya got?” he replies. By the early 1960s, Holly-
wood had retooled its business model, shifting empha-
sis  away  from  adults  and  families  to  teenagers.  The
“teenpic” soon included multiple genres: horror, rock ’n’
roll, dangerous youth, and beach party, among others.

Rock ’n’ Roll  What really defined the youth culture,
however, was its music. Rejecting the romantic ballads
of the 1940s, teenagers discovered rock ’n’ roll, which
originated in African American rhythm and blues. The
Cleveland  disc  jockey  Alan  Freed  took  the  lead  in
introducing white America to the black-created sound

by playing what were called “race” records. “If I could
find  a  white  man  who  had  the  Negro  sound  and  the
Negro  feel,  I  could  make  a  billion  dollars,”  a  record
company  owner  is  quoted  as  saying.  The  performer
who  fit  that  bill  was  Elvis  Presley,  who  rocketed  into
instant celebrity in 1956 with his hit records “Hound
Dog”  and  “Heartbreak  Hotel,”  covers  of  songs  origi-
nally  recorded  by  black  artists  such  as  Big  Mama
Thornton.  Between  1953  and  1959,  record  sales
increased from $213 million to $603 million, with rock
’n’ roll as the driving force.

Many unhappy adults saw in rock ’n’ roll music an
invitation  to  interracial  dating,  rebellion,  and  a  more
flagrant sexuality. The media featured hundreds of sto-
ries  on  problem  teens,  and  denunciations  of  the  new
music poured forth from many corners. Such condem-
nation only  deflected  off  the  new  youth  culture  or,  if
anything,  increased  its  popularity.  Both  Hollywood
and the music industry had learned that youth rebel-
lion sold tickets.

Cultural  Dissenters  Youth  rebellion  was  only  one
aspect  of  a  broader  discontent  with  the  sometimes

Motown

Mary Wilson, Diana Ross, and Florence
Ballard (from left to right) were the founding
members of the Motown singing group the
Supremes (shown here in concert in 1964),
which produced twelve number-one singles.
Motown, a record label owned by African
American entrepreneur Berry Gordy, special-
ized in so-called cross-over acts: black singers
who sold records to white audiences. In the
era of Jim Crow, Motown represented a
small but noteworthy step toward a less
racially segregated American culture. Photo
by RB/Redferns/Getty Images.

