saccharine  consumer  culture  of  the  1950s.  Many  art-
ists, writers, and jazz musicians embarked on powerful
new  experimental  projects  in  a  remarkable  flowering
of  intensely  personal,  introspective  art  forms.  Black
musicians  developed  a  hard-driving  improvisational
style known as bebop. Whether the “hot” bebop of sax-
ophonist  Charlie  Parker  or  the  more  subdued  “cool”
sound of the influential trumpeter Miles Davis, post-
war jazz was cerebral, intimate, and individualistic. As
such, it stood in stark contrast to the commercialized,
dance-oriented “swing” bands of the 1930s and 1940s.
Black jazz musicians found eager fans not only in
the  African  American  community  but  also  among
young white Beats, a group of writers and poets cen-
tered  in New  York  and  San  Francisco who  disdained
middle-class materialism. In his poem “Howl” (1956),
which  became  a  manifesto  of  the  Beat  generation,
Allen Ginsberg lamented: “I saw the best minds of my
generation  destroyed  by  madness,  starving  hysterical
naked, dragging themselves through the negro streets
at dawn looking for an angry fix.” In works such as Jack
Kerouac’s novel On the Road (1957), the Beats glorified
spontaneity, sexual adventurism, drug use, and spiritu-
ality. The Beats were apolitical, but their cultural rebel-
lion would, in the 1960s, inspire a new generation of
young rebels disenchanted with both the political and
cultural status quo.

Religion and the Middle Class
In an age of anxiety about nuclear annihilation and the
spread  of  “godless  communism,”  Americans  yearned
for a reaffirmation of faith. Church membership jumped
from 49 percent of the population in 1940 to 70 percent
in  1960.  People  flocked  to  the  evangelical  Protestant
denominations, beneficiaries of a remarkable new crop
of preachers. Most eloquent was the young Reverend
Billy  Graham,  who  made  brilliant  use  of  television,
radio, and advertising. His massive 1949 revival in Los
Angeles  and  his  1957  crusade  at  Madison  Square
Garden in New York, attended or viewed by hundreds
of thousands of Americans, established Graham as the
nation’s leading evangelical.

Rather  than  clashing  with  the  new  middle-class
ethic  of  consumption,  the  religious  reawakening  was
designed  to  mesh  with  it.  Preachers  such  as  Graham
and the California-based Robert Schuller told Ameri-
cans that so long as they lived moral lives, they deserved
the  material  blessings  of  modern  life.  No  one  was
more  influential  in  this  regard  than  the  minister  and
author Norman Vincent Peale, whose best-selling book
The  Power  of  Positive  Thinking  (1952)  embodied  the

CHAPTER 26

  Triumph of the Middle Class, 1945–1963

849

therapeutic use of religion as an antidote to life’s trials
and  tribulations.  Peale  taught  that  with  faith  in
God and “positive thinking,” anyone could overcome
obstacles  and  become  a  success.  Graham,  Schuller,
Peale, and other 1950s evangelicals laid the foundation
for the rise of the televangelists, who created popular
television ministries in the 1970s.

The postwar purveyors of religious faith cast Amer-
i cans  as  a  righteous  people  opposed  to  communist
atheism. When Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were sen-
tenced to death in 1953, the judge criticized them for
“devoting themselves to the Russian ideology of denial
of  God.”  Cold  War  imperatives  drew  Catholics,
Protestants,  and  Jews  into  an  influential  ecumenical
movement that downplayed doctrinal differences. The
phrase  “under  God”  was  inserted  into  the  Pledge  of
Allegiance  in  1954,  and  U.S.  coins  carried  the  words

Billy Graham

Charismatic and inspiring, Billy Graham wore down shoe
leather to bring Christian conversion to hundreds of thou-
sands of Americans in the 1940s and 1950s, preaching to
large crowds such as this one in Columbia, South Carolina.
He also migrated onto the radio and television airwaves,
using technology to reach even wider audiences. Graham
used the Cold War to sharpen his message, telling Americans
that “godless communism” was an inferior system, but that
democracy in America required belief in God and a constant
struggle against “sin.” Photo by John Dominis/Time Life Pictures/
Getty Images.

