850

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

“In  God  We  Trust”  after  1956.  These  religious  initia-
tives  struck  a  distinctly  moderate  tone,  however,  in
comparison  with  the  politicized  evangelism  that
emerged in the 1960s and 1970s (Chapter 29).

The American Family in the
Era of Containment
Marriage, family structure, and gender roles had been
undergoing  significant  changes  since  the  turn  of  the
twentieth century (Chapter 18). Beginning in the nine-
teenth  century,  middle-class  Americans  increasingly
saw  marriage  as  “companionate,”  that  is,  based  on
romantic love and a lifetime of shared friendship. Com-
panionate  did  not  mean  equal.  In  the  mid-twentieth
century,  family  life  remained  governed  by  notions  of
paternalism,  in  which  men  provided  economic  sup-
port  and  controlled  the  family’s  financial  resources,
while  women  cared  for  children  and  occupied  a  sec-
ondary position in public life.

The resurgent postwar American middle class was
preoccupied with the virtues of paternalism. Everyone
from professional psychologists to television advertis-
ers and every organization from schools to the popular
press celebrated nuclear families. Children were prized,
and women’s caregiving roles were valorized. This view
of  family  life,  and  especially  its  emphasis  on  female
“domesticity,”  was  bolstered  by  Cold  War  politics.
Americans  who  deviated from  prevailing  gender  and
familial  norms  were  not  only  viewed  with  scorn  but
were  also  sometimes  thought  to  be  subversive  and
politically  dangerous.  The  word  containment  could
apply  to  the  home  as  easily  as  to  foreign  policy.  The
family had become politicized by the Cold War.

The  model  of  domesticity  so  highly  esteemed  in
postwar middle-class morality hid deeper, longer-term
changes  in  the  way  marriage,  gender  roles,  women’s
work, and even sex were understood. To comprehend
the postwar decades, we have to keep in mind both the
value  placed  on  domesticity  and  the  tumultuous
changes surging beneath its prescriptions.

having babies. Everyone expected to have several chil-
dren — it  was  part  of  adulthood,  almost  a  citizen’s
responsibility. After a century and a half of decline, the
birthrate  shot  up.  More  babies  were  born  in  the  six
years  between  1948  and  1953  than  in  the  previous
thirty years (Figure 26.3).

One  of  the  reasons  for  this  baby  boom  was  that
people were having children at the same time. A sec-
ond was a drop in the average marriage age — down to
twenty-two for men and twenty for women. Younger
parents meant a bumper crop of children. Women who
came of age in the 1930s averaged 2.4 children; their
counterparts in the 1950s averaged 3.2 children. Such a
dramatic turnaround reflected couples’ decisions dur-
ing  the  Great  Depression  to  limit  childbearing  and
couples’ contrasting decisions in the postwar years to
have  more  children.  The  baby  boom  peaked  in  1957
and remained at a high level until the early 1960s. Far
from “normal,” all of these developments were anoma-
lies, temporary reversals of long-standing demographic
trends. From the perspective of the whole of the twen-
tieth  century,  the  1950s  and  early  1960s  stand  out  as
exceptions to declining birthrates, rising divorce rates,
and the steadily rising marriage age.

The  passage  of  time  revealed  the  ever-widening
impact of the baby boom. When baby boomers com-
peted  for  jobs  during  the  1970s,  the  labor  market
became  tight.  When  career-oriented  baby  boomers
belatedly began having children in the 1980s, the birth-
rate jumped. And in our own time, as baby boomers

50

46

42

38

34

30

26

22

18

14

)
0
0
0
,
1
r
e
p
(
e
t
a
r
h
t
r
i
B

The Baby Boom
A popular 1945 song was called “Gotta Make Up for
Lost  Time,”  and  Americans  did  just  that.  Two  things
were noteworthy about the families they formed after
World War II: First, marriages were remarkably stable.
Not until the mid-1960s did the divorce rate begin to
rise  sharply.  Second,  married  couples  were  intent  on

1860

1880

1900

1920
Year

1940

1960

1980

FIGURE 26.3
The American Birthrate, 1860–1980

When birthrates are viewed over more than a century,
the postwar baby boom is clearly only a temporary
reversal of the long-term downward trend in the
American birthrate.

