begin  retiring,  huge  funding  problems  threaten  to
engulf  Social  Security  and  Medicare.  The  intimate
decisions of so many couples after World War II con-
tinued to shape American life well into the twenty-first
century.

Improving Health and Education  Baby boom chil-
dren benefitted from a host of important advances in
public  health  and  medical  practice  in  the  postwar
years.  Formerly  serious  illnesses  became  merely  rou-
tine  after  the  introduction  of  such  “miracle  drugs”
as  penicillin  (introduced  in  1943),  streptomycin
(1945),  and  cortisone  (1946).  When  Dr.  Jonas  Salk
perfected  a  polio  vaccine  in  1954,  he  became  a
national  hero.  The  free  distribution  of  Salk’s  vaccine
in the nation’s schools, followed in 1961 by Dr. Albert
Sabin’s oral polio vaccine, demonstrated the potential
of government-sponsored public health programs.

The baby boom also gave the nation’s educational
system a boost. Postwar middle-class parents, America’s
first  college-educated  generation, placed  a  high  value
on education. Suburban parents approved 90 percent
of school bond issues during the 1950s. By 1970, school
expenditures  accounted  for  7.2  percent  of  the  gross
national product, double the 1950 level. In the 1960s,
the baby boom generation swelled college enrollments.
State university systems grew in tandem: the pioneer-
ing University of California, University of Wisconsin,
and State University of New York systems added doz-
ens  of  new  campuses  and  offered  students  in  their
states a low-cost college education.

Dr.  Benjamin  Spock  To  keep  baby  boom  children
healthy  and  happy,  middle-class  parents  increasingly
relied on the advice of experts. Dr. Benjamin Spock’s
Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care sold 1 mil-
lion  copies  every  year  after  its  publication  in  1946.
Spock  urged  mothers  to  abandon  the  rigid  feeding
and baby-care schedules of an earlier generation. New
mothers found Spock’s commonsense approach liber-
ating.  “Your  little  paperback  is  still  in  my  cupboard,
with  loose  pages,  rather  worn  from  use  because  I
brought up two babies using it as my ‘Bible,’ ” a Cali-
fornia housewife wrote to Spock.

Despite his commonsense approach to child rear-
ing,  Spock  was  part  of  a  generation  of  psychological
experts whose advice often failed to reassure women. If
mothers were too protective, Spock and others argued,
they  might  hamper  their  children’s  preparation  for
adult life. On the other hand, mothers who wanted to
work outside the home felt guilty because Spock rec-
ommended that they be constantly available for their

CHAPTER 26

  Triumph of the Middle Class, 1945–1963

851

children.  As  American  mothers
aimed for the perfection demanded
of them seemingly at every turn,
many  began  to  question  these
mixed  messages.  Some  of  them
would  be  inspired  by  the  resur-
gence of feminism in the 1960s.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
Why was there an increase
in births in the decades
after World War II, and
what were some of the
effects of this baby boom?

Women, Work, and Family
Two powerful forces shaped women’s relationships to
work and family life in the postwar decades. One was
the middle-class domestic ideal, in which women were
expected to raise children, attend to other duties in the
home, and devote themselves to their husbands’ happi-
ness. So powerful was this ideal that in 1957 the Ladies’
Home  Journal  entitled  an  article,  “Is  College  Educa-
tion Wasted on Women?” The second force was the job
market. Most working-class women had to earn a pay-
check to help their family. And despite their education,
middle-class women found that jobs in the professions
and business were dominated by men and often closed
to  them.  For  both  groups,  the  market  offered  mostly
“women’s jobs” — in teaching, nursing, and other areas
of  the  growing  service  sector — and  little  room  for
advancement (American Voices, p. 852).

The idea that a woman’s place was in the home was,
of course, not new. The postwar obsession with femi-
ninity and motherhood bore a remarkable similarity to
the  nineteenth  century’s  notion  of  domesticity.  The
updated version drew on new elements of twentieth-
century  science  and  culture.  Psychologists  equated
motherhood  with  “normal”  female  identity  and  sug-
gested that career-minded mothers needed therapy. “A
mother who runs out on her children to work — except
in cases of absolute necessity — betrays a deep dissatis-
faction with motherhood or with her marriage,” wrote
one leading psychiatrist. Television shows and movies
depicted career women as social misfits. The postwar
consumer culture also emphasized women’s domestic
role as purchasing agents for home and family. “Can a
woman ever feel right cooking on a dirty range?” asked
one advertisement.

The postwar domestic ideal held that women’s prin-
cipal economic contribution came through consump-
tion — women shopped for the family. In reality, their
contributions  increasingly  took  them  outside  their
homes  and  into  the  workforce.  In  1954,  married
women made up half of all women workers. Six years
later,  the  1960  census  reported  a  stunning  fact:  the
number  of  mothers  who  worked  had  increased  four
times, and over one-third of these women had children

