A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Coming of Age in the

Postwar Years

At the dawn of the postwar era, Americans faced new opportunities and new
anxieties. Many former soldiers attended college and purchased new homes on
the  GI  Bill,  which  forever  changed  their  lives.  Women  faced  new  pressures  to
realize the ideal role of housewife and mother. On the horizon, both in reality
and in the American imagination, lurked communism, which Americans feared
but little understood. And racial segregation continued to shape the ordinary
lives of Americans. Recorded here are several different reactions to these post-
war tensions, distinct experiences of coming of age in the 1940s and 1950s.

Art Buchwald
Studying on the GI Bill

Art  Buchwald  was  one  of  the  best-known  humorists  in
American journalism. But in 1946, he was an ordinary ex-
serviceman using the GI Bill to go to college.

It was time to face up to whether I was serious about
attending school. My decision was to go down to the
University of Southern California and find out what I
should study at night to get into the place. There were at
least 4,000 ex-GIs waiting to register. I stood in line with
them. Hours later, I arrived at the counter and said, “I
would like to . . .” The clerk said, “Fill this out.”

Having been accepted as a full-time student under
the G.I. Bill, I was entitled to seventy-five dollars a month
plus tuition, books, and supplies. Meanwhile, I found a
boardinghouse a few blocks from campus, run by a cheery
woman who was like a mother to her thirteen boarders. . . .
At the time, just after the Second World War had ended,
an undeclared class war was going on at USC. The G.I.s
returning home had little use for the fraternity men, since
most of the frat boys were not only much younger, but
considered very immature.

The G.I.s were intent on getting their educations and

starting new lives.

Source: From Leaving Home: A Memoir, by Art Buchwald (New York: G. P. Putnam’s
Sons, 1993). Used by permission of Joel Buchwald.

Betty Friedan
Living the Feminine Mystique

Like  Buchwald,  Betty  Friedan  would  one  day  become
famous  as  a  writer — author  of  one  of  the  most  widely
read  books  of  the  1960s,  The  Feminine  Mystique.  In  the
late  1940s,  Friedan  was  not  yet  a  feminist,  but  she  was
deeply engaged in the politics of the era.

And then the boys our age had come back from the war.
I was bumped from my job on a small labor news service

852

by a returning veteran, and it wasn’t so easy to find another
job I really liked. I filled out the applications for Time-Life
researcher, which I’d always scorned before. All the girls
I knew had jobs like that, but it was official policy that no
matter how good, researchers, who were women, could
never become writers or editors. They could write the whole
article, but the men they were working with would always
get the by-line as writer. I was certainly not a feminist
then — none of us were a bit interested in women’s rights.
But I could never bring myself to take that kind of job.

After the war, I had been very political, very involved,
consciously radical. Not about women, for heaven’s sake!
If you were a radical in 1949, you were concerned about
the Negroes, and the working class, and World War III,
and the Un-American Activities Committee and McCarthy
and loyalty oaths, and Communist splits and schisms,
Russia, China and the UN, but you certainly didn’t think
about being a woman, politically.

Source: From “It Changed My Life”: Writings on the Women’s Movement, by Betty
Friedan (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1976). Copyright © 1963 by Betty
Friedan. Reprinted by permission of Curtis Brown, Ltd.

Susan Allen Toth
Learning About Communism

Toth is a writer who grew up in Ames, Iowa, surrounded
by cornﬁelds. She writes here about her experience learn-
ing  just  how  anxious  people  could  become  in  the  1950s
when the issue of communism was raised.

Of course, we all knew there was Communism. As early
as sixth grade our teacher warned us about its dangers. I
listened carefully to Mr. Casper describe what Commu-
nists wanted, which sounded terrible. World domination.
Enslavement. Destruction of our way of life. I hung around
school one afternoon hoping to catch Mr. Casper, whom
I secretly adored, to ask him why Communism was so
bad. He stayed in another teacher’s room so late I finally
scrawled my question on our blackboard: “Dear Mr.
Casper, why is Communism so bad . . . Sue Allen” and

