went home. Next morning the message was still there. Like
a warning from heaven it had galvanized Mr. Casper. He
began class with a stern lecture, repeating everything he
had said about dangerous Russians and painting a vivid
picture of how we would all suffer if the Russians took
over the city government in Ames. We certainly wouldn’t
be able to attend a school like this, he said, where free
expression of opinion was allowed. At recess that day one
of the boys asked me if I was a “dirty Commie”: two of my
best friends shied away from me on the playground; I saw
Mr. Casper talking low to another teacher and pointing at
me. I cried all the way home from school and resolved never
to commit myself publicly with a question like that again.

Source: From Susan Allen Toth, “Boyfriend” from Blooming: A Small-Town Girlhood.
Reprinted by permission of Molly Friedrich on behalf of the author.

Melba Patillo Beals
Encountering Segregation

Melba Patillo Beals was one of the “Little Rock Nine,” the
high  school  students  who  desegregated  Central  High
School in Little Rock, Arkansas, in 1957. Here she recounts
an  experience  documenting  what  it  was  like  to  come  of
age as a black southerner under Jim Crow.

An experience I endured on a December morning would
forever affect any decision I made to go “potty” in a public
place. We were Christmas shopping when I felt the twinge
of emergency. I convinced Mother and Grandmother that
I knew the way to restroom by myself. I was moving as fast
as I could when suddenly I knew I wasn’t going to make
it all the way down those stairs and across the warehouse
walkway to the “Colored Ladies” toilet. So I pushed open
the door marked “White Ladies” and, taking a deep breath,
I crossed the threshold. It was just as bright and pretty as
I had imagined it to be. . . . Across the room, other white
ladies sat on a couch reading the newspaper. Suddenly
realizing I was there, two of them looked at me in aston-
ishment. Unless I was the maid, they said, I was in the
wrong place. While they shouted at me to “get out,” my
throbbing bladder consumed my attention as I frantically
headed for the unoccupied stall. They kept shouting
“Good lord, do something.” I was doing something by
that time, seated comfortably on the toilet, listening
to the hysteria building outside my locked stall. One
woman even knelt down to peep beneath the door to
make certain that I didn’t put my bottom on the toilet
seat. She ordered me not to pee.

Source: Reprinted with permission of Atria Publishing Group, a Division of Simon &
Schuster, Inc. Warriors Don’t Cry: A Searing Memoir of the Battle to Integrate Little Rock
by Melba Patillo Beals. Copyright © 1994, 1995 by Melba Beals. All rights reserved.

David Beers
California Suburbia

David Beers grew up in the suburbs of California, in what
would  eventually  become  known  as  Silicon  Valley.  In  his
memoir, he recalls the ritual of buying a house.

“We never looked at a used house,” my father remembers
of those days in the early 1960s when he and my mother
went shopping for a home of their own in the Valley of
Heart’s Delight. “A  used house did not interest us.” Instead,
they roved in search of balloons and bunting and the many
billboards advertising Low Interest! No Money Down! to
military veterans like my father. They would follow the
signs to the model homes standing in empty fields and
tour the empty floor plans and leave with notes carefully
made about square footage and closet space. “We shopped
for a new house,” my father says, “the way you shopped
for a car.” . . . We were blithe conquerors, my tribe. When
we chose a new homeland, invaded a place, settled it, and
made it over in our image, we did so with a smiling sense
of our own inevitability. . . . We were drawn to the prom-
ise of a blank page inviting our design upon it.

Source: David Beers, Blue Sky Dream: A Memoir of America’s Fall from Grace (New York:
Harcourt, Brace, & Company, 1996), 31, 39.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  What do you think Buchwald meant by “an undeclared
class war”? Why would the inﬂux of GI Bill veterans into
colleges create conﬂict?

2.  Why do you think Friedan “didn’t think about being a

woman, politically” in the 1940s and 1950s? Why do you
think she was “bumped from” her job by a “returning
veteran”?

3.  What does Toth’s experience as a young student suggest
about American anxieties during the Cold War? Why
would her question cause embarrassment and ridicule?

4.  What does Beals’s experience suggest about the

indignities faced by young people on the front lines of
challenging racial segregation? Does it help explain why
youth were so important in breaking racial barriers?
5.  What do you think Beers means by “our tribe”? What

was the “blank page”?

853

