854

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Mom at Home and at Work

Middle-class women’s lives grew increasingly complicated in the postwar decades. They may have dreamed
of a suburban home with a brand-new kitchen, like the one shown in this 1955 photograph (left), but labor-
ing all day over children, dirty dishes, and a hot stove proved dissatisfying to many. Betty Friedan called the
conﬁnement of women’s identities to motherhood the “feminine mystique,” but did the working woman
have it much better? Hardly. Most women in the 1950s and 1960s were conﬁned to low-level secretarial
work (right), waitressing, and other service-sector work — or, worse, factory or domestic labor. By the end
of the 1960s, women had begun to crack the “glass ceiling” and enter the professions in larger numbers.
But regardless of their occupation, the majority of working women performed the “double day”: a full day
at work and a full day at home. Such were the expectations and double bind women faced. Elliott Erwitt/
Magnum Photos./Inge Morath © The Inge Morath Foundation/Magnum Photos.

between  the  ages  of  six  and  seventeen.  In  that  same
year, 30 percent of wives worked, and by 1970, it was
40  percent.  For  working-class  women,  in  particular,
the  economic  needs  of  their  families  demanded  that
they work outside the home.

Despite rising employment rates, occupational seg-
mentation still haunted women. Until 1964, the classi-
fied  sections  of  newspapers  separated  employment
ads  into  “Help  Wanted  Male”  and  “Help  Wanted
Female.”  More  than  80  percent  of  all  employed
women did stereotypical women’s
work  as  salesclerks,  health-care
technicians,  waitresses,  steward-
esses,  domestic  servants,  recep-
tionists, telephone operators, and
secretaries.  In  1960,  only  3  per-
cent  of  lawyers  and  6  percent  of
physicians  were  women;  on  the
flip side, 97 percent of nurses and 85 percent of librari-
ans  were  women.  Along  with  women’s  jobs  went

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
What transformations in
women’s economic role
took place in the 1950s
and 1960s?

women’s pay, which averaged 60 percent of men’s pay
in 1963.

Contrary  to  stereotype,  however,  women’s  paid
work  was  not  merely  supplementary.  It  helped  lift
families into the middle class. Even in the prosperous
1950s, many men found that their wages could not pay
for  what  middle-class  life  demanded:  cars,  houses,
vacations, and college education for the children. Many
families needed more than one wage earner just to get
by. Among married women, the highest rates of labor-
force participation in the 1950s were found in families
at the lower end of the middle class. Over the course of
the  postwar  decades,  from  1945  to  1965,  more  and
more women, including married women, from all class
backgrounds, entered the paid workforce.

How  could  American  society  steadfastly  uphold
the domestic ideal when so many wives and mothers
were out of the house and at work? In many ways, the
contradiction  was  hidden  by  the  women  themselves.
Fearing  public  disapproval,  women  would  explain

