CHAPTER 26

  Triumph of the Middle Class, 1945–1963

855

their work in family-oriented terms — as a way to save
money for the children’s college education, for instance.
Moreover, when women took jobs outside the home,
they  still  bore  full  responsibility  for  child  care  and
household  management,  contributing  to  the  “double
day”  of  paid  work  and  family  work.  As  one  overbur-
dened woman noted, she now had “two full-time jobs
instead  of  just  one — underpaid  clerical  worker  and
unpaid housekeeper.” Finally, the pressures of the Cold
War made strong nuclear families with breadwinning
fathers and domesticated mothers symbols of a healthy
nation. Americans wanted to believe this even if it did
not perfectly describe the reality of their lives.

Challenging Middle-Class Morality
In many ways, the two decades between 1945 and 1965
were  a  period  of  cultural  conservatism  that  reflected
the  values  of  domesticity.  At  the  dawn  of  the  1960s,
going  steady  as  a  prelude  to  marriage  was  the  fad  in
high school. College women had curfews and needed
permission  to  see  a  male  visitor.  Americans  married
young; more than half of those who married in 1963
were under the age of twenty-one. After the birth con-
trol pill came on the market in 1960, few doctors pre-
scribed  it  to  unmarried  women,  and  even  married
women did not enjoy unfettered access to contracep-
tion until the Supreme Court ruled it a “privacy” right
in the 1965 decision Griswold v. Connecticut.

Alfred  Kinsey  Yet  beneath  the  surface  of  middle-
class  morality,  Americans  were  less  repressed  than
confused.  They  struggled  to  reconcile  new  freedoms
with  older  moral  traditions.  This  was  especially  true
with  regard  to  sex.  Two  controversial  studies  by  an
unassuming  Indiana  University  zoologist  named
Alfred Kinsey forced questions about sexuality into the
open. Kinsey and his research team published Sexual
Behavior in the Human Male in 1948 and followed it up
in 1953 with Sexual Behavior in the Human Female —
an  842-page  book  that  sold  270,000  copies  in  the
first  month  after  its  publication.
Taking  a  scientific,  rather  than
moralistic, approach, Kinsey, who
became  known  as  “the  sex  doc-
tor,” documented the full range of
sexual  experiences  of  thousands
of  Americans.  He  broke  numer-
ous taboos, discussing such topics
as homosexuality and marital infidelity in the detached
language of science.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What were the con-
tradictions in postwar
domesticity and middle-
class morality?

Both  studies  confirmed  that  a  sexual  revolution,
although  a  largely  hidden  one,  had  already  begun  to
transform American society by the early 1950s. Kinsey
estimated that 85 percent of men had had sex prior to
marriage  and  that  more  than  25  percent  of  married
women had had sex outside of marriage by the age of
forty.  These  were  shocking  public  admissions  in  the
late 1940s and early 1950s, and “hotter than the Kinsey

The Kinsey Reports

Like the woman on the cover of this lighthearted 1953 book of photo-
graphs, many Americans reacted with surprise when Alfred Kinsey revealed
the country’s sexual habits. In his 1948 book about men and his 1953
book about women, Kinsey wrote about American sexual practices in
the detached language of science. But it still made for salacious reading.
Evangelical minister Billy Graham (p. 849) warned: “It is impossible to
estimate the damage this book will do to the already deteriorated morals
of America.” Picture Research Consultants & Archives.

