856

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

report” became a national figure of speech. Kinsey was
criticized by statisticians — because his samples were not
randomly  selected — and  condemned  even  more  fer-
vently  by  religious  leaders,  who  charged  him  with
encouraging promiscuity and adultery. But his research
opened a national conversation with profound impli-
cations for the future. Even if Kinsey’s numbers were off,
he helped Americans learn to talk more openly about sex.

The Homophile Movement  Among the most con-
troversial  of  Kinsey’s  claims  was  that  homosexuality
was far more prevalent than most Americans believed.
Although the American Psychiatric Association would
officially  define  homosexuality  as  a  mental  illness  in
1952, Kinsey’s research found that 37 percent of men
had engaged in some form of homosexual activity by
early  adulthood,  as  had  13  percent  of  women.  Even
more  important,  Kinsey  claimed  that  10  percent  of
American  men  were  exclusively  homosexual.  These
claims came as little surprise, but great encouragement,
to a group of gay and lesbian activists who called them-
selves  “homophiles.”  Organized  primarily  in  the
Mattachine Society (the first gay rights organization in
the  country,  founded  in  1951)  and  the  Daughters  of
Bilitis (a lesbian organization founded in 1955), homo-
philes were a small but determined collection of activ-
ists who sought equal rights for gays and lesbians. “The
lesbian is a woman endowed with all the attributes of
any  other  woman,”  wrote  the  pioneer  lesbian  activist
Del Martin in 1956. “The salvation of the lesbian lies in
her acceptance of herself without guilt or anxiety.”

Building on the urban gay and lesbian communities
that  had  coalesced  during  World  War  II,  homophiles
sought  to  change  American  attitudes  about  same-sex
love.  They  faced  daunting  obstacles,  since  same-sex
sexual relations were illegal in every state and scorned,
or feared, by most Americans. To combat prejudice and
change the laws, homophile organizations cultivated a
respectable, middle-class image. Members were encour-
aged to avoid bars and nightclubs, to dress in conserva-
tive  shirts  and  ties  (for  men)  and  modest  skirts  and
blouses (for women), and to seek out professional psy-
chologists who would attest to their “normalcy.” Only
in  the  1960s  did  homophiles  begin  to  talk  about  the
“homophile vote” and their “rights as citizens,” laying the
groundwork for the gay rights movement of the 1970s.

Media  and  Morality  The  homophile  movement
remained  unknown  to  most  Americans.  But  other
challenges  to  traditional  morality  received  national
media attention, and the media themselves became a
controversial  source  of  these  challenges.  Concerned
that excessive crime, violence, and sex in comic books

were encouraging juvenile delinquency, the U.S. Senate
held nationally televised hearings in 1954. The Senate’s
final report, written largely by the Tennessee Democrat
Estes Kefauver, complained of the “scantily clad women”
and  “penchant  for  violent  death”  common  in  comic
books aimed at teenagers. Kefauver’s report forced the
comics  industry  to  tame  its  wildest  practices  but  did
little to slow the growing frankness about both sex and
violence in the nation’s printed media and films.

To see a longer excerpt from the Senate hearing
on juvenile delinquency, along with other primary
sources from this period, see Sources for America’s
History.

A  magazine  entrepreneur  from  Chicago  named
Hugh  Hefner  played  a  leading  role  in  that  growing
frankness. Hefner founded Playboy magazine in 1953,
in which he created a countermorality to domesticity: a
fictional  world  populated  by  “hip”  bachelor  men  and
sexually available women. Hefner’s imagined bachelors
condemned marriage and lived in sophisticated apart-
ments filled with the latest stereo equipment and other
consumer products. While domesticated fathers bought
lawn  mowers  and  patio  furniture,  Hefner’s  magazine
encouraged men to spend money on clothing and jazz
albums  for  themselves,  and  for  the  “scantily  clad
women” that filled its pages. Hefner and his numerous
imitators  became  powerful  purveyors  of  sex  in  the
media. But Hefner was the exception that proved the
rule: marriage, not swinging bachelorhood, remained
the destination for the vast majority of men. Millions of
men read Playboy, but few adopted its fantasy lifestyle.

A Suburban Nation
Prosperity — how  much  an  economy  produces,  how
much  people  earn — is  more  easily  measured  than  is
quality of life. During the 1950s, however, the American
definition  of  the  good  life  emerged  with  exceptional
distinctness: a high value on consumption, a devotion
to family and domesticity, and preference for suburban
living. In this section, we consider the third dimension
of  that  definition:  suburbanization.  What  drove  the
nation to abandon its cities for the suburbs, and what
social and political consequences did this shift have?

The Postwar Housing Boom
Migration to the suburbs had been going on for a hun-
dred years, but never before on the scale that the coun-
try experienced after World War II. Within a decade,

