farmland on the outskirts of cities filled up with tract
housing and shopping malls. Entire counties that had
once  been  rural — such  as  San  Mateo,  south  of  San
Francisco, or Passaic and Bergen in New Jersey, west of
Manhattan — went  suburban.  By  1960,  one-third  of
Americans lived in suburbs. Home construction, hav-
ing  ground  to  a  halt  during  the  Great  Depression,
surged after the war. One-fourth of the country’s entire
housing stock in 1960  had not even existed a decade
earlier.

William J. Levitt and the FHA  Two unique postwar
developments  remade  the  national  housing  market
and gave it a distinctly suburban shape. First, an inno-
vative  Long  Island  building  contractor,  William  J.
Levitt,  revolutionized  suburban  housing  by  applying
mass-production  techniques  and  turning  out  new
homes  at  a  dizzying  speed.  Levitt’s  basic  four-room
house, complete with kitchen appliances, was priced at
$7,990 when homes in the first Levittown went on sale
in 1947 (about $76,000 today). Levitt did not need to
advertise;  word  of  mouth  brought  buyers  flocking  to
his developments (all called Levittown) in New York,
Pennsylvania, and New Jersey. Dozens of other devel-
opers  were  soon  snapping  up  cheap  farmland  and
building subdivisions around the country.

Even  at  $7,990,  Levitt’s  homes  would  have  been
beyond the means of most young families had the tra-
ditional  home-financing  standard — a  down  payment
of half the full price and ten years to pay off the bal-
ance — still  prevailed. That  is  where  the  second  post-
war  development  came  in.  The  Federal  Housing
Administration (FHA) and the Veterans Administration
(VA) — that  is,  the  federal  government — brought  the
home mortgage market within the reach of a broader
range of Americans than ever before. After the war, the
FHA insured thirty-year mortgages with as little as 5
percent  down  and  interest  at  2  or  3  percent.  The  VA
was  even  more  generous,  requiring  only  a  token  $1
down  for  qualified  ex-GIs.  FHA  and  VA  mortgages
best explain why, after hovering around 45 percent for
the previous half century, home ownership jumped to
60 percent by 1960.

What purchasers of suburban houses got, in addi-
tion to a good deal, were homogeneous communities.
The  developments  contained  few  elderly  people  or
unmarried adults. Even the trees were young. Levitt’s
company  enforced  regulations  about  maintaining
lawns and not hanging out laundry on the weekends.
Then there was the matter of race. Levitt’s houses came
with  restrictive  covenants  prohibiting  occupancy  “by
members of other than the Caucasian Race.” (Restrictive
covenants  often  applied  to  Jews  and,  in  California,

CHAPTER 26

  Triumph of the Middle Class, 1945–1963

857

Asian  Americans  as  well.)  Levit towns  were  hardly
alone.  Suburban  developments  from  coast  to  coast
exhibited the same age, class, and
racial  homogeneity
(Thinking
Like a Historian, p. 858).

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
Place postwar suburban-
ization in the context
of the growing size and
inﬂuence of the federal
government. How did
the national government
encourage suburbaniza-
tion?

In  Shelley  v.  Kraemer  (1948),
the  Supreme  Court  outlawed
restrictive covenants, but racial dis-
crimination  in  housing  changed
little.  The  practice  persisted  long
after Shelley, because the FHA and
VA continued the policy of redlin-
ing: refusing mortgages to African
Americans and members of other
minority  groups  seeking  to  buy  in  white  neigh-
borhoods.  Indeed,  no  federal  law — or  even  Court
decisions like Shelley — actually prohibited racial dis-
crimination in housing until Congress passed the Fair
Housing Act in 1968.

Interstate Highways  Without automobiles, subur-
ban growth on such a massive scale would have been
impossible.  Planners  laid  out  subdivisions  on  the
assumption  that  everybody  would  drive.  And  they
did — to  get  to  work,  to  take  the  children  to  Little
League, to shop. With gas plentiful and cheap (15 cents
a gallon), no one cared about the fuel efficiency of their
V-8 engines or seemed to mind the elaborate tail fins
and  chrome  that  weighed  down  their  cars.  In  1945,
Americans  owned  twenty-five  million  cars;  by  1965,
just  two  decades  later,  the  number  had  tripled  to
seventy-five  million  (America  Compared,  p.  860).
Amer ican oil consumption followed course, tripling as
well between 1949 and 1972.

More cars required more highways, and the federal
government obliged. In 1956, in a move that drastically
altered  America’s  landscape  and  driving  habits,  the
National Interstate and Defense Highways Act autho-
rized  $26  billion  over  a  ten-year  period  for  the  con-
struction of a nationally integrated highway system —
42,500 miles (Map 26.1). Cast as a Cold War necessity
because  broad  highways  made  evacuating  crowded
cities  easier  in  the  event  of  a  nuclear  attack,  the  law
changed American cities forever. An enormous public
works program surpassing anything undertaken dur-
ing  the  New  Deal,  and  enthusiastically  endorsed  by
the Republican president, Dwight Eisenhower, federal
highways made possible the massive suburbanization
of the nation in the 1960s. Interstate highways rerouted
traffic away from small towns, bypassed well-traveled
main  roads  such  as  the  cross-country  Route  66,  and
cut  wide  swaths  through  old  neighborhoods  in  the
cities.

