T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

The Suburban

Landscape of Cold

War America

Between the end of World War II and the 1980s, Americans built and moved into
suburban homes in an unprecedented wave of construction and migration that
changed  the  nation  forever.  New  home  loan  rules,  and  government  backing
under the Federal Housing Administration and Veterans Administration, made
new suburban houses cheaper and brought home ownership within reach of a
larger  number  of  Americans  than  ever  before.  Commentators  cheered  these
developments as a boon to ordinary citizens, but by the 1960s a generation of
urban  critics,  led  by  journalist  Jane  Jacobs,  had  begun  to  ﬁnd  fault  with  the
nation’s  suburban  obsession.  The  following  documents  provide  the  historian
with  evidence  of  how  these  new  suburban  communities  arose  and  how  they
began to transform American culture.

1.  “Peacetime Cornucopia,” The New Yorker,

2.  Life magazine, “A Life Round Table on Housing,”

October 6, 1945.

January 31, 1949.

The most aggressive member of Life’s Round Table, whether
as builder or debater, was William J. Levitt, president of
Levitt and Sons, Inc. of Manhasset, NY. He feels that he
has started a revolution, the essence of which is size.
Builders in his estimation are a poor and puny lot, too
small to put pressure on materials manufacturers or the
local czars of the building codes or the bankers or labor. A
builder ought to be a manufacturer, he said, and to this
end must be big. He himself is a nonunion operator.

The Levitt prescription for cheaper houses may be
summarized as follows: 1) take infinite pains with infinite
details; 2) be aggressive; 3) be big enough to throw your
weight around; 4) buy at wholesale; and 5) build houses
in concentrated developments where mass-production
methods can be used on the site.

3.  Site plan sketch for Park Forest, Illinois, 1946.

© Constanin Alajalov/New Yorker/Conde Nast Publications.

858

The Park Forest Historical Society.

