4.  William H. Whyte Jr., The Organization Man, 1956.
Whyte, a prominent journalist, wrote about the
decline of individualism and the rise of a national
class of interchangeable white-collar workers.

And is this not the whole drift of our society? We are not
interchangeable in the sense of being people without dif-
ferences, but in the externals of existence we are united
by a culture increasingly national. And this is part of the
momentum of mobility. The more people move about, the
more similar American environments become, and the
more similar they become, the easier it is to move about.
More and more, the young couples who move do so
only physically. With each transfer the décor, the architec-
ture, the faces, and the names may change; the people, the
conversation, and the values do not — and sometimes the
décor and architecture don’t either. . . .

Suburban residents like to maintain that their subur-
bia not only looks classless but is classless. That is, they
are apt to add on second thought, there are no extremes,
and if the place isn’t exactly without class, it is at least a
one-class society — identified as the middle or upper
middle, according to the inclination of the residents.
“We are all,” they say, “in the same boat.”

5.  Jane Jacobs, The Death and Life of Great American
Cities, 1961. A classic celebration of vibrant urban
neighborhoods by a New York writer and architec-
tural critic.

Although it is hard to believe, while looking at dull gray
areas, or at housing projects or at civic centers, the fact is
that big cities are natural generators of diversity and pro-
lific incubators of new enterprises and ideas of all kinds. . . .
This is because city populations are large enough to
support wide ranges of variety and choice in these things.
And again we find that bigness has all the advantages in
smaller settlements. Towns and suburbs, for instance, are
natural homes for huge supermarkets and for little else
in the way of groceries, for standard movie houses or
drive-ins and for little else in the way of theater. There
are simply not enough people to support further variety,
although there may be people (too few of them) who
would draw upon it were it there. Cities, however, are
the natural homes of supermarkets and standard movie
houses plus delicatessens, Viennese bakeries, foreign
groceries, art movies, and so on. . . .

The diversity, of whatever kind, that is generated by
cities rests on the fact that in cities so many people are so
close together, and among them contain so many different
tastes, skills, needs, supplies, and bees in their bonnets.

6.  Herbert J. Gans, The Levittowners, 1967. One of
the ﬁrst sociological studies of the new postwar
suburbs and their residents.

The strengths and weakness of Levittown are those of
many American communities, and the Levittowners
closely resemble other young middle class Americans.
They are not America, for they are not a numerical
majority of the population, but they represent the
major constituency of the latest and more powerful
economic and political institutions in American
society — the favored customers and voters whom
these seek to attract and satisfy. . . .

Although they are citizens of a national polity and
their lives are shaped by national economic, social, and
political forces, Levittowners deceive themselves into
thinking that the community, or rather the home, is the
single most important unit of their lives. . . .

In viewing their homes as the center of life, Levi-
towners are still using a societal model that fit the rural
America of self-sufficient farmers and the feudal Europe
of self-isolating extended families.

Sources: (2) Life, January 31, 1949, 74; (4) William H. Whyte Jr., The Organization Man
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1956), 276, 299; (5) Jane Jacobs, The Death and Life of
Great American Cities (Westminster, MD: Vintage, 1992), 145–147; (6) Herbert J. Gans,
The Levittowners (New York: Columbia University Press, 1982), 417–418.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Compare sources 1, 4, and 6. How do they reinforce or

contradict one another?

2.  In source 4, what does Whyte mean by “classless”? Why
would suburbanites wish to think of their communities
as not beset by class inequality? Were they right in this
point of view?

3.  Do you see evidence in source 2 of the ways the postwar
housing market was transformed? How does Levitt’s
vision of the home-building industry relate to other
kinds of American industries?

4.  In source 5, what advantages does Jacobs see in large

cities over suburbs? Can you interpret source 3 from the
perspective that Jacobs outlines in source 5?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Write an essay in which you use the knowledge you’ve
gained from this chapter and the documents provided
above to explore postwar suburbanization. What did it
mean to the American economy? To ordinary Americans?
What ﬂaws did its critics see?

859

