A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Hanoch Bartov:

Everyone Has a Car

One of Israel’s foremost writers and journalists, Hanoch Bartov spent two years
in the United States working as a correspondent for the newspaper Lamerchav.
As a newcomer to Los Angeles in the early 1960s, he was both fascinated and
appalled by Americans’ love affair with the automobile.

Our immediate decision to buy a car sprang from healthy
instincts. Only later did I learn from bitter experience that
in California, death was preferable to living without one.
Neither the views from the plane nor the weird excursion
that first evening hinted at what I would go through that
first week.

Very simple — the nearest supermarket was about
half a kilometer south of our apartment, the regional
primary school two kilometers east, and my son’s
kindergarten even farther away. A trip to the post
office — an undertaking, to the bank — an ordeal,
to work — an impossibility. . . .

There are no tramways. No one thought of a subway.
Railroads — not now and not in the future. Why? Because
everyone has a car. A man invited me to his house, saying,
“We are neighbors, within ten minutes of each other.”
After walking for an hour and a half I realized what he
meant — “ten minute drive within the speed limit.” Simply
put, he never thought I might interpret his remark to refer
to the walking distance. The moment a baby sees the light
of day in Los Angeles, a car is registered in his name in
Detroit. . . .

At first perhaps people relished the freedom and inde-

pendence a car provided. You get in, sit down, and grab
the steering wheel, your mobility exceeding that of any
other generation. No wonder people refuse to live down-

town, where they can hear their neighbors, smell their
cooking, and suffer frayed nerves as trains pass by bed-
room windows. Instead, they get a piece of the desert, far
from town, at half price, drag a water hose, grow grass,
flowers, and trees, and build their dream house.

The result? A widely scattered city, its houses far apart,

its streets stretched in all directions. Olympic Boulevard
from west to east, forty kilometers. Sepulveda Boulevard,
from Long Beach in the south to the edge of the desert,
forty kilometers. Altogether covering 1,200 square kilo-
meters. As of now.

Source: “Measures of Affluence” by Hanoch Bartov (1963) in Chapter 16 from The
Outer World, edited by Oscar Handlin and Lilian Handlin (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1997). © 1997. Reprinted by permission of Oscar and Lillian Handlin.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  From Bartov’s observations, what are the pluses and

minuses of America’s car culture? In what ways was the
automobile changing American society?

2.  Why did Bartov ﬁnd that owning a car was necessary,

especially in southern California?

3.  How would suburbanization have contributed to the
construction of new highways in the United States?
How would highway construction have facilitated
suburbanization?

Fast Food and Shopping Malls  Americans did not
simply  fill  their  new  suburban  homes  with  the  latest
appliances  and  gadgets;  they  also  pioneered  entirely
new  forms  of  consumption.  Through  World  War  II,
downtowns had remained the center of retail sales and
restaurant dining with their grand department stores,
elegant eateries, and low-cost diners. As suburbanites
abandoned  big-city  centers  in  the  1950s,  ambitious
entrepreneurs  invented  two  new  commercial  forms
that  would  profoundly  shape  the  rest  of  the  century:
the shopping mall and the fast-food restaurant.

By  the  late  1950s,  the  suburban  shopping  center
had become as much a part of the American landscape
as the Levittowns and their imitators. A major devel-
oper  of  shopping  malls  in  the  Northeast  called  them

“crystallization  points  for  suburbia’s  community  life.”
He romanticized the new structures as “today’s village
green,” where “the fountain in the mall has replaced the
downtown department clock as the gathering place for
young  and  old  alike.”  Romanticism  aside,  suburban
shopping centers worked perfectly in the world of sub-
urban consumption; they brought “the market to the
people  instead  of  people  to  the  market,”  commented
the  New  York  Times.  In  1939,  the  suburban  share  of
total metropolitan retail trade in the United States was
a  paltry  4  percent.  By  1961,  it  was  an  astonishing  60
percent in the nation’s ten largest metropolitan regions.
No one was more influential in creating suburban
patterns of consumption than a Chicago-born son of
Czech  immigrants  named  Ray  Kroc.  A  former  jazz

860

