CHAPTER 26

  Triumph of the Middle Class, 1945–1963

861

0

250

500 miles

0 250

500 kilometers

0

250

500 miles

0 250

500 kilometers

Main U.S. highways, 1930

Interstate highways, 1970

MAP 26.1
Connecting the Nation: The Interstate Highway System, 1930 and 1970

The 1956 National Interstate and Defense Highways Act paved the way for an extensive network of
federal highways throughout the nation. The act not only pleased American drivers and enhanced
their love affair with the automobile but also beneﬁtted the petroleum, construction, trucking,
real estate, and tourist industries. The new highway system promoted the nation’s economic
integration, facilitated the growth of suburbs, and contributed to the erosion of America’s distinct
regional identities.

musician and traveling salesman, Kroc found his call-
ing in 1954 when he acquired a single franchise of the
little-known  McDonald’s  Restaurant,  based  in  San
Bernardino,  California.  In  1956,  Kroc  invested  in
twelve  more  franchises  and  by  1958  owned  seventy-
nine. Three years later, Kroc bought the company from

the McDonald brothers and proceeded to turn it into
the largest chain of restaurants in the world. Based on
inexpensive,  quickly  served  hamburgers  that  hungry
families could eat in the restaurant, in their cars, or at
home,  Kroc’s  vision  transformed  the  way  Americans
consumed  food.  “Drive-in”  or  “fast”  food  became  a

Fast Food, 1949

The sign atop this suburban
Los Angeles restaurant says it
all. Suburbanization laid the
foundation for a unique post-
war phenomenon that would
forever change American life:
the rise of fast food. Cheap,
convenient, and “fast,” the
food served in the new res-
taurants, modeled after the
industry’s pioneer, McDonald’s,
was not necessarily nutritious,
but its chief advantage was
portability. Loomis Dean/Time
Life Pictures/Getty Images.

