862

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

staple of the American diet in the subsequent decades.
By the year 2000, fast food was a $100 billion industry,
and more children recognized Ronald McDonald, the
clown  in  McDonald’s  television  commercials,  than
Santa Claus.

Rise of the Sunbelt
Suburban living, although a nationwide phenomenon,
was  most  at  home  in  the  Sunbelt  (the  southern  and
southwestern states), where taxes were low, the climate
was mild, and open space allowed for sprawling subdi-
visions (Map 26.2). Florida added 3.5 million people,
many of them retired, between 1940 and 1970. Texas
profited  from  expanding  petrochemical  and  defense
industries.  Most  dramatic  was  California’s  growth,
spurred  especially  by  the  state’s  booming  defense-
related  aircraft  and  electronics  industries.  By  1970,

California contained one-tenth of the nation’s popula-
tion  and  surpassed  New  York  as  the  most  populous
state. At the end of the century, California’s economy
was among the top ten largest in the world — among
nations.

A  distinctive  feature  of  Sunbelt  suburbanization
was  its  close  relationship  to  the  military-industrial
complex.  Building  on  World  War  II  expansion,  mili-
tary bases proliferated in the South and Southwest in
the postwar decades, especially in Florida, Texas, and
California.  In  some  instances,  entire  metropolitan
regions — such  as  San  Diego  County,  California,  and
the Houston area in Texas — expanded in tandem with
nearby  military  outposts.  Moreover,  the  aerospace,
defense, and electronics industries were based largely
in  Sunbelt  metropolitan  regions.  With  government
contracts fueling the economy and military bases pro-
viding thousands of jobs, Sunbelt politicians had every

Seattle

San Francisco-
Oakland

Los Angeles

San Diego

Minneapolis-
St. Paul

Detroit

Boston

New York

Chicago

Cleveland

Pittsburgh

Philadelphia

Baltimore

Population Size
(in millions)

Denver

St. Louis

Washington

Dallas-
Ft. Worth

Houston

Atlanta

Tampa

Miami

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

13.0–18.0

9.0–12.9

5.0–8.9
3.0–4.9
1.0–2.9
0.1–0.9

1950 population
1980 population

Change in State
Population,
1950–1980

200–400%
100–200%
50–100%
0–50%
Loss

MAP 26.2
Shifting Population Patterns, 1950–1980

This map shows the two major, somewhat overlapping, patterns of population movement between
1950 and 1980. Most striking is the rapid growth of the Sunbelt states. All the states experiencing
increases of over 100 percent in that period are in the Southwest, plus Florida. The second pattern
involves the growth of metropolitan areas, deﬁned as a central city or urban area and its suburbs.
The central cities were themselves mostly not growing, however. The metropolitan growth shown
in this map was accounted for by the expanding suburbs. And because Sunbelt growth was primarily
suburban growth, that’s where we see the most rapid metropolitan growth, with Los Angeles the
clear leader.

