CHAPTER 26

  Triumph of the Middle Class, 1945–1963

863

incentive to support vigorous defense spending by the
federal government.

concentrated,”  noted  the  civil  rights  activist  Bayard
Rustin.

Sunbelt  suburbanization  was  best  exemplified  by
Orange County, California. Southwest of Los Angeles,
Orange County was until the 1940s mostly just that — a
land of oranges, groves of them. But during World War
II, boosters attracted new bases and training facilities
for  the  marines,  navy,  and  air  force  (at  the  time  the
army air corps). Cold War militarization and the Korean
War kept those bases humming, and Hughes Aircraft,
Ford Aeronautics, and other defense-related manufac-
turers built new plants in the sunny, sprawling groves.
So did subdivision developers, who built so many new
homes that the population of the county jumped from
130,760 in 1940 to 703,925 in 1960. Casting his eye on
all  this  development  in  the  early  1950s,  an  entrepre-
neurial filmmaker and cartoonist named Walt Disney
chose  Anaheim  in  Orange  County  as  the  place  for  a
massive new amusement park. Disneyland was to the
new generation of suburbanites what Coney Island had
been to an earlier generation of urbanites.

Two Societies: Urban and Suburban
While middle-class whites flocked to the suburbs, an
opposite  stream  of  working-class  migrants,  many  of
them southern African Americans, moved into the cit-
ies. In the 1950s, the nation’s twelve largest cities lost
3.6 million whites while gaining 4.5 million nonwhites.
These  urban  newcomers  inherited  a  declining  econ-
omy and a decaying infrastructure. To those enjoying
prosperity,  the  “other  America,”  as  the  social  critic
Michael  Harrington  called  it,  remained  largely  invis-
ible. In 1968, however, a report by the National Advisory
Commission on Civil Disorders (informally known as
the Kerner Commission and formed by the president to
investigate the causes of the 1967  urban riots), deliv-
ered  to  President  Lyndon  Johnson,  warned  that  “our
nation is moving toward two societies, one black, one
white, separate and unequal.”

American  cities  had  long  been  the  home  of  pov-
erty,  slum  housing,  and  the  hardships  and  cultural
dislocations  brought  on  by  immigration  from  over-
seas or migration from rural areas. But postwar Amer-
ican cities, especially those in the industrial Northeast
and  Midwest,  experienced  these  problems  with  new
intensity. By the 1950s, the manufacturing sector was
contracting, and mechanization was eliminating thou-
sands  upon  thousands  of  unskilled  and  semiskilled
jobs,  the  kind  traditionally  taken  up  by  new  urban
residents.  The  disappearing  jobs  were  the  ones  “in
which  [Afri can  Americans]  are  disproportionately

The Urban Crisis  The intensification of poverty, the
deterioration  of  older  housing  stock,  and  the  persis-
tence of racial segregation produced what many at the
time called the urban crisis. Unwelcome in the shiny
new  suburbs  built  by  men  such  as  William  J.  Levitt,
African Americans found low-paying jobs in the city
and  lived  in  aging,  slumlike  apartment  buildings.
Despite a thriving black middle class — indeed, larger
than ever before — for those without resources, upward
mobility remained elusive. Racism in institutional forms
frustrated  African  Americans  at  every  turn:  housing
restrictions,  increasingly  segregated  schools,  and  an
urban  infrastructure  that  stood  underfunded  and
decaying as whites left for the suburbs.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
In what sense was the
United States becoming,
in the language of the
Kerner Commission report,
“two societies”?

to

Housing and job discrimination were compounded
by  the  frenzy  of  urban  renewal  that  hit  black  neigh-
borhoods  in  the  1950s  and  early
revitalize
1960s.  Seeking
declining  city  centers,  politicians
and  real  estate  developers  pro-
posed  razing  blighted  neighbor-
hoods  to  make  way  for  modern
construction  projects  that  would
appeal to the fleeing middle class.
In Boston, almost one-third of the
old  city — including  the  historic  West  End,  a  long-
established Italian neighborhood — was demolished to
make way for a  new highway, high-rise housing, and
government  and  commercial  buildings.  In  San  Fran-
cisco, some 4,000 residents of the Western Addition, a
predominantly  black  neighborhood,  lost  out  to  an
urban  renewal  program  that  built  luxury  housing,  a
shopping  center,  and  an  express  boulevard.  Between
1949 and 1967, urban renewal nationwide demolished
almost  400,000  buildings  and  displaced  1.4  million
people.

The urban experts believed they knew what to do
with the dislocated: relocate them to federally funded
housing projects, an outgrowth of New Deal housing
policy, now much expanded. However well intended,
these grim projects too often took the form of cheap
high-rises  that  isolated  their  inhabitants  from  sur-
rounding  neighborhoods.  The  impact  was  felt  espe-
cially strongly among African Americans, who often
found  that  public  housing  increased  racial  segrega-
tion  and  concentrated  the  poor.  The  Robert  Taylor
Homes in Chicago, with twenty-eight buildings of six-
teen stories each, housed 20,000 residents, almost all
of  them  black.  Despite  the  planners’  wish  to  build

