864

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Urban Crisis

This Pittsburgh neighborhood,
photographed in 1955, typiﬁed
what many came to call the
“urban crisis” of the 1950s and
1960s. As suburbanization drew
middle-class residents, investment,
and jobs away from the core of
older cities, those cities began to
rot from the inside. Urban neglect
left many working-class neighbor-
hoods, increasingly occupied by
the nation’s poor, with few jobs,
little industry, and dilapidated
housing. W. Eugene Smith/Black Star/
Stockphoto.com.

decent  affordable  apartments,  the  huge  complex
became  a  notorious  breeding  ground  for  crime  and
hopelessness.

Urban Immigrants  Despite the evident urban crisis,
cities  continued  to  attract  immigrants  from  abroad.
Since the passage of the National Origins Act of 1924
(Chapter  22),  U.S.  immigration  policy  had  aimed
mainly at keeping foreigners out. But World War II and
the Cold War began slowly to change American policy.
The Displaced Persons Act of 1948 permitted the entry
of  approximately  415,000  Europeans,  many  of  them
Jewish refugees. In a gesture to an important war ally,
the Chinese Exclusion Act was repealed in 1943. More
far-reaching was the 1952 McCarran-Walter Act, which
ended the exclusion of Japanese, Koreans, and South-
east Asians.

After the national-origins quota system went into
effect in 1924, Mexico replaced Eastern and Southern
Europe  as  the  nation’s  labor  reservoir.  During  World
War II, the federal government introduced the Bracero
Program to ease wartime labor shortages (Chapter 24)
and  then  revived  it  in  1951,  during  the  Korean  War.
The  federal  government’s  ability  to  force  workers  to
return  to  Mexico,  however,  was  strictly  limited.  The
Mexican  immigrant  population  continued  to  grow,
and by the time the Bracero Program ended in 1964,
many  of  that  group — an  estimated  350,000 — had
settled permanently in the United States. Braceros were
joined  by  other  Mexicans  from  small  towns  and  vil-
lages, who immigrated to the United States to escape

poverty or to earn money to return home and purchase
land for farming.

As  generations  of  immigrants  had  before  them,
Mexicans  gravitated  to  major  cities.  Mostly,  they
settled in Los Angeles, Long Beach, San Jose, El Paso,
and  other  southwestern  cities.  But  many  also  went
north, augmenting well-established Mexican American
communities  in  Chicago,  Detroit,  Kansas  City,  and
Denver. Although still important to American agricul-
ture, Mex ican Americans were employed in substantial
numbers as industrial and service workers by 1960.

Another major group of Spanish-speaking migrants
came from Puerto Rico. American citizens since 1917,
Puerto Ricans enjoyed an unrestricted right to move to
the mainland United States. Migration increased dra-
matically after World War II, when mechanization of
the  island’s  sugarcane  agriculture  left  many  Puerto
Ricans  jobless.  Airlines  began  to  offer  cheap  direct
flights between San Juan and New York City. With the
fare  at  about  $50  (two  weeks’  wages),  Puerto  Ricans
became America’s first immigrants to arrive en masse
by air. Most Puerto Ricans went to New York, where
they settled first in East (“Spanish”) Harlem and then
scattered  in  neighborhoods  across  the  city’s  five  bor-
oughs.  This  massive  migration,  which  increased  the
Puerto  Rican  population  to  613,000  by  1960,  trans-
formed the ethnic composition of the city. More Puerto
Ricans now lived in New York City than in San Juan.

Cuban refugees constituted the third-largest group
of Spanish-speaking immigrants. In the six years after
Fidel Castro’s seizure of power in 1959 (Chapter 25), an

