CHAPTER 26

  CHAPTER REVIEW

865

estimated  180,000  people  fled  Cuba  for  the  United
States. The Cuban refugee community grew so quickly
that  it  turned  Miami  into  a  cosmopolitan,  bilingual
city  almost  overnight.  Unlike  other  urban  migrants,
Miami’s Cubans quickly prospered, in large part because
they had arrived with money and middle-class skills.

Spanish-speaking immigrants — whether Mexican,
Puerto  Rican,  or  Cuban — created  huge  barrios  in
major American cities, where bilingualism flourished,
the Catholic Church shaped religious life, and families
sought to join the economic mainstream. Though dis-
tinct from one another, these Spanish-speaking com-
munities  remained  largely  segregated  from  white,  or
Anglo,  neighborhoods  and  suburbs  as  well  as  from
African American districts.

SUMMARY
We  have  explored  how,  at  the  same  time  it  became
mired  in  the  Cold  War,  the  United  States  entered  an
unparalleled era of prosperity in which a new middle
class came into being. Indeed, the Cold War was one of
the  engines  of  prosperity.  The  postwar  economy  was

marked  by  the  dominance  of  big  corporations  and
defense spending.

After years of depression and war-induced insecu-
rity, Americans turned inward toward religion, home,
and family. Postwar couples married young, had sev-
eral  children,  and — if  they  were  white  and  middle
class — raised their children in a climate of suburban
comfort and consumerism. The profamily orientation
of the 1950s  celebrated traditional gender roles, even
though  millions  of  women  entered  the  workforce  in
those  years.  Not  everyone,  however,  shared  in  the
postwar prosperity. Postwar cities increasingly became
places  of  last  resort  for  the  nation’s  poor.  Black
migrants,  unlike  earlier  immigrants,  encountered  an
urban economy that had little use for them. Without
opportunity, and faced with pervasive racism, many of
them  were  on  their  way  to  becoming  an  American
underclass,  even  as  sparkling  new  suburbs  emerged
outside  cities  to  house  the  new  middle  class.  Many
of  the  smoldering  contradictions  of  the  postwar
period — Cold  War  anxiety  in  the  midst  of  suburban
domesticity, tensions in women’s  lives, economic and
racial inequality — helped spur the protest movements
of the 1960s.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

kitchen debate (p. 838)
Bretton Woods (p. 840)
World Bank (p. 840)
International Monetary Fund

(IMF) (p. 840)

military-industrial complex

(p. 841)

Sputnik (p. 842)
National Defense Education

Act (p. 842)

The Affluent Society (p. 843)
The Other America (p. 843)

Veterans Administration (p. 843)
collective bargaining (p. 844)
teenager (p. 847)
Beats (p. 849)
baby boom (p. 850)
Shelley v. Kraemer (p. 857)
National Interstate and Defense

Highways Act (p. 857)

Sunbelt (p. 862)
Kerner Commission (p. 863)

Key People

Dwight D. Eisenhower (p. 841)
Miles Davis (p. 849)
Allen Ginsberg (p. 849)
Jack Kerouac (p. 849)
Billy Graham (p. 849)
Dr. Benjamin Spock (p. 851)
William J. Levitt (p. 857)

