866

PART 8

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  What factors led to the economic prosperity of the

postwar era?

2.  Why  did  the  suburbs  become  so  significant  for
Americans  in  the  1950s?  How  was  suburban  life
related to middle-class consumption?

3.  Who were the people left out of the postwar boom?

How do you account for their exclusion?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events  listed  under  “America  in  the  World”  and
“Work, Exchange, and Technology” for the period
1930–1945  on  the  thematic  timeline  on  page  671
and for 1945–1960 on page 803. Explain how the
United States began the 1930s in deep depression
with  unemployment  near  25  percent  and  ended
the  1950s  with  an  expanded  middle  class  and  a
consumption-driven economy.

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  Think  back  to
earlier  chapters  that  discussed  gender  roles,  mar-
riage,  and  American  family  life  in  the  late  nine-
teenth and early twentieth centuries (Chapters 18,
19, 22, 24). How had the American family changed
by the 1950s? What aspects of family life remained
similar across many decades? For example, how did
the  working-class  immigrant  family  of  the  1890s
differ from the middle-class family of the 1950s?

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  Examine the Motorola TV
advertisement featured on page 847. What different
types of appeals does this advertisement make, and
what do they suggest about family and gender roles
in this period? How many distinct themes from the
chapter can you explain using this image?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Lizabeth Cohen, A Consumers’ Republic: The Politics of
Mass Consumption in Postwar America (2003). An
important interpretation of the United States as a
consumer society.

James Gilbert, Men in the Middle: Searching for
Masculinity in the 1950s (2005). An engaging account
of cultural figures from the 1950s, including Billy
Graham and John Wayne.

David Halberstam, The Fifties (1993). An engaging
and accessible introduction to postwar American
society.

Karal Ann Marling, As Seen on TV (1996). An
insightful explanation of the impact of television.

Elaine Tyler May, Homeward Bound (1988). The
classic introduction to postwar family life.

Thomas J. Sugrue, The Origins of the Urban Crisis:
Race and Inequality in Postwar Detroit (1996). The
best account of the urban crisis.

