Walking into Freedom Land:
The Civil Rights Movement
1941–1973

In  June  1945,  as  World  War  II  was

ending,  Democratic  senator  James  O.
Eastland  of  Mississippi  stood  on  the
ﬂoor  of  the  U.S.  Senate  and  brashly  told
his  colleagues  that  “the  Negro  race  is  an
inferior race.” Raising his arms, his tie askew
from vigorous gesturing, Eastland ridiculed
black troops. “The Negro soldier was an utter and dismal failure in combat,” he said.

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
How  did  the  civil  rights  movement
evolve over time, and how did com-
peting  ideas  and  political  alliances
affect  its  growth  and  that  of  other
social movements?

Eastland’s assertions were untrue. Black soldiers had served honorably; many won
medals for bravery in combat. All-black units, such as the 761st “Black Panther” Tank
Battalion and the famous Tuskegee Airmen, were widely praised by military command-
ers. But segregationists like Eastland were a nearly unassailable force in Congress, able
to block civil rights legislation and shape national opinion.

In the 1940s, two generations after W. E. B. Du Bois famously wrote that “the prob-
lem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line,” few white Americans
believed  wholeheartedly  in  racial  equality.  Racial  segregation  remained  entrenched
across the country. Much of the Deep South, like Eastland’s Mississippi, was a “closed
society”: black people had no political rights and lived on the margins of white society,
impoverished and exploited. Northern cities proved more hospitable to African Ameri-
cans,  but  schools,  neighborhoods,  and  many  businesses  remained  segregated  and
unequal in the North as well.

Across the nation, however, winds of change were gathering. Between World War
II and the 1970s, slowly at ﬁrst, and then with greater urgency in the 1960s, the civil
rights movement swept aside systematic racial segregation. It could not sweep away
racial inequality completely, but the movement constituted a “second Reconstruction”
in which African American activism reshaped the nation’s laws and practices. Civil rights
was the paradigmatic social movement of the twentieth century. Its model of nonviolent
protest and its calls for self-determination inspired the New Left, feminism, the Chicano
movement, the gay rights movement, the American Indian movement, and many others.
The black-led civil rights movement, joined at key moments by Latinos, Asian Amer-
icans, and Native Americans, redeﬁned liberalism. In the 1930s, New Deal liberalism had
established a welfare state to protect citizens from economic hardship. The civil rights
movement  forged  a  new  rights  liberalism:  the  notion  that  individuals  require  state
protection from discrimination. This version of liberalism focused on identities — such as
race or sex — rather than general social welfare, and as such would prove to be both a
necessary expansion of the nation’s ideals and a divisive force that produced political
backlash. Indeed, the quest for racial justice would contribute to a crisis of liberalism
itself.

27

C H A P T E R

THE EMERGING CIVIL
RIGHTS STRUGGLE,
1941–1957

Life Under Jim Crow

Origins of the Civil Rights

Movement

World War II: The Beginnings

Cold War Civil Rights

Mexican Americans and
Japanese Americans

Fighting for Equality Before

the Law

FORGING A PROTEST
MOVEMENT, 1955–1965

Nonviolent Direct Action

Legislating Civil Rights,

1963–1965

BEYOND CIVIL RIGHTS,
1966–1973

Black Nationalism

Poverty and Urban Violence

Rise of the Chicano Movement

The American Indian Movement

868

