870

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

The Emerging Civil Rights
Struggle, 1941–1957
As  it  took  shape  during  World  War  II  and  the  early
Cold War, the battle against racial injustice proceeded
along two tracks: at the grass roots and in governing
institutions — federal courts, state legislatures, and ulti-
mately the U.S. Congress. Labor unions, churches, and
protest  organizations  such  as  the  Congress  of  Racial
Equality  (CORE)  inspired  hundreds  of  thousands  of
ordinary citizens to join the movement. But grassroots
struggle  was  not  African  Americans’  only  weapon.
They  also  had  the  Bill  of  Rights  and  the  Reconstruc-
tion  amendments  to  the  Constitution.  Civil  rights
lived in those documents — especially in the Fourteenth
Amend ment,  which  guaranteed  equal  protection
under the law to all U.S. citizens, and in the Fifteenth,
which guaranteed the right to vote regardless of “race,
color,  or  previous  condition  of  servitude” — but  had
been ignored or violated for nearly a century. The task
was  to  restore  the  Constitution’s  legal  force.  Neither
track — grassroots  or  legal/legislative — was  entirely
independent  of  the  other.  Together,  they  were  the

foundation of the fight for racial equality in the post-
war decades.

Life Under Jim Crow
Racial segregation and economic exploitation defined
the lives of the majority of African Americans in the
postwar decades. Numbering 15 million in 1950, Afri-
can  Americans  were  approximately  10  percent  of  the
U.S.  population.  In  the  South,  however,  they  consti-
tuted between 30 and 50 percent of the population of
several states, such as South Carolina and Mississippi.
Segregation,  commonly  known  as  Jim  Crow  (Chap-
ter 18), prevailed in every aspect of life in the southern
states, where two-thirds of all African Americans lived
in 1950. African Americans could not eat in restaurants
patronized by whites or use the same waiting rooms at
bus  stations.  All  forms  of  public  transportation  were
rigidly  segregated  by  custom  or  by  law.  Public  parks
and libraries were segregated. Even drinking fountains
were labeled “White” and “Colored.”

This system of segregation underlay economic and
political  structures  that  further  marginalized  and
disempowered  black  citizens.  Virtually  no  African

Segregation in Mobile, 1956

As the law of the land in most southern
states, racial segregation (known as Jim
Crow) required the complete separation
of blacks and whites in most public spaces.
The “white only” drinking fountain shown
in this 1956 photograph in Mobile, Alabama,
was typical. Everything from waiting areas to
libraries, public parks, schools, restrooms, and
even cola vending machines was subject to
strict racial segregation. Gordon Parks, courtesy
of the Gordon Parks Foundation.

