CHAPTER 27

  Walking into Freedom Land: The Civil Rights Movement, 1941–1973

871

Ameri can could work for city or state government, and
the  best  jobs  in  the  private  sector  were  reserved  for
whites. Black workers labored “in the back,” cleaning,
cooking,  stocking  shelves,  and  loading  trucks  for  the
lowest  wages.  Rural  African  Americans  labored  in  a
sharecropping system that kept them stuck in poverty,
often  prevented  them  from  obtaining  an  education,
and  offered  virtually  no  avenue  of  escape.  Politically,
less  than  20  percent  of  eligible  black  voters  were
allowed to vote, the result of poll taxes, literacy tests,
intimidation, fraud, and the “white primary” (elections
in which only whites could vote). This near-total disen-
franchisement gave whites power disproportionate to
their  numbers — black  people  were  one-third  of  the
residents of Mississippi, South Carolina, and Georgia
but had virtually no political voice in those states.

In the North, racial segregation in everyday life was
less  acute  but  equally  tangible.  Northern  segregation
took  the  form  of  a  spatial  system  in  which  whites
increasingly lived in suburbs or on the outskirts of cit-
ies,  while  African  Americans  were  concentrated  in
declining  downtown  neighborhoods.  The  result  was
what many called ghettos: all-black districts character-
ized by high rents, low wages, and inadequate city ser-
vices.  Employment  discrimination  and  lack  of  ade-
quate  training  left  many  African  Americans  without
any  means  of  support.  Few  jobs  other  than  the  most
menial  were  open  to  African  Americans;  journalists,
accountants, engineers, and other highly educated men
from  all-black  colleges  and  universities  often  labored
as railroad porters or cooks because jobs commensu-
rate  with  their  skills  remained  for  whites  only.  These
conditions  produced  a  self-perpetuating  cycle  that
kept far too many black citizens trapped on the social
margins.

To  be  certain,  African  Americans  found  greater
freedom in the North and West than in the South. They
could vote, participate in politics, and, at least after the
early 1960s, enjoy equal access to public accommoda-
tions. But we err in thinking that racial segregation was
only a southern problem or that poverty and racial dis-
crimination  were  not  also  deeply  entrenched  in  the
North  and  West.  In  northern  cities  such  as  Detroit,
Chicago,  and  Philadelphia,  for  instance,  white  home
owners in the 1950s used various tactics — from police
harassment to thrown bricks, burning crosses, bombs,
and mob violence — to keep African Americans from
living near them. Moreover, as we saw in Chapter 26,
Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and bank red-
lining excluded African American home buyers from the
all-white suburbs emerging around major cities. Racial
segregation was a national, not regional, problem.

Origins of the Civil Rights Movement
Since racial discrimination had been part of American
life  for  hundreds  of  years,  why  did  the  civil  rights
movement  arise  when  it  did?  After  all,  the  National
Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Colored  People
(NAACP),  founded  in  1909,  had  begun  challenging
racial segregation in a series of court cases in the 1930s.
And  other  organizations,  such  as  Marcus  Garvey’s
United Negro Improvement Association in the 1920s,
had attracted significant popular support. These prece-
dents were important, but several factors came together
in the middle of the twentieth century to make a broad
movement possible.

An  important  influence  was  World  War  II.  “The
Jewish  people  and  the  Negro  people  both  know  the
meaning  of  Nordic  supremacy,”  wrote  the  African
American poet Langston Hughes in 1945. In the war
against  fascism,  the  Allies  sought  to  discredit  racist
Nazi  ideology.  Committed  to  fighting  racism  abroad,
Americans  increasingly  condemned  racism  at  home.
The Cold War placed added pressure on U.S. officials.
“More  and  more  we  are  learning  how  closely  our
democracy  is  under  observation,”  President  Harry  S.
Truman commented in 1947. To inspire other nations
in the global standoff with the Soviet Union, Truman
explained,  “we  must  correct  the  remaining  imperfec-
tions in our practice of democracy.”

IDENTIFY CAUSES
How did the growth of the
black middle class assist
the civil rights movement?

Among  the  most  consequential  factors  was  the
growth  of  the  urban  black  middle  class.  Historically
small,  the  black  middle  class  experienced  robust
growth  after  World  War  II.  Its
ranks  produced  most  of  the  civil
rights leaders: ministers, teachers,
trade  unionists,  attorneys,  and
other professionals. Churches, for
centuries  a  sanctuary  for  black
Americans,  were  especially  important.  Moreover,  in
the 1960s African Amer i can college students — part of
the largest expansion of college enrollment in U.S. his-
tory — joined the movement, adding new energy and
fresh  ideas  (Table  27.1).  With  access  to  education,
media,  and  institutions,  this  new  middle  class  had
more  resources  than  ever  before.  Less  dependent  on
white patronage, and therefore less vulnerable to white
retaliation, middle-class African Americans were in a
position to lead a movement for change.

Still other influences assisted the movement. White
labor  leaders  were  generally  more  equality-minded
than the rank and file, but the United Auto Workers,
the  United  Steelworkers,  and  the  Com munications
Workers of America, among many other trade unions,

