872

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

TABLE 27.1

African American College Enrollment

Year

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Number of African Americans Enrolled
(rounded to nearest thousand)

  60,000

110,000

185,000

430,000

1.4 million

3.6 million

were  reliable  allies  at  the  national  level.  The  new
medium  of  television,  too,  played  a  crucial  role.
When television networks covered early desegregation
struggles,  such  as  the  1957  integration  of  Little  Rock
High  School,  Americans  across  the  country  saw  the

violence of white supremacy firsthand. None of these
factors alone was decisive. None ensured an easy path.
The civil rights movement faced enormous resistance
and  required  dauntless  courage  and  sacrifice  from
thousands upon thousands of activists for more than
three  decades.  Ultimately,  however,  the  movement
changed  the  nation  for  the  better  and  improved  the
lives of millions of Americans.

World War II: The Beginnings
During  the  war  fought  “to  make  the  world  safe  for
democracy,”  the  United  States  was  far  from  ready  to
extend  full  equality  to  its  own  black  citizens.  Black
workers faced discrimination in wartime employment,
and the more than one million black troops who served
in World War II were placed in segregated units com-
manded  by  whites.  Both  at  home  and  abroad,  World
War  II  “immeasurably  magnified  the  Negro’s  aware-
ness of the disparity between the American profession

Postwar Desegregation

Picketers outside the July 1948 Democratic National Convention demand that the party include equal
rights and anti–Jim Crow planks in its ofﬁcial platform and desegregate the armed services. Leading
the pickets is A. Philip Randolph, president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. Randolph
headed the March on Washington Movement that pressured President Roosevelt to desegregate
defense employment during World War II, and he led the committee that convinced President
Truman to desegregate the armed forces in 1948. © Bettmann/Corbis.

