CHAPTER 27

  Walking into Freedom Land: The Civil Rights Movement, 1941–1973

873

and practice of democracy,” NAACP president Walter
White observed.

Executive Order 8802  On the home front, activists
pushed two strategies. First, A. Philip Randolph, whose
Brotherhood  of  Sleeping  Car  Porters  was  the  most
prominent  black  trade  union,  called  for  a  march  on
Washington in early 1941. Randolph planned to bring
100,000  protesters  to  the  nation’s  capital  if  African
Americans  were  not  given  equal  opportunity  in  war
jobs — then  just  beginning  to  expand  with  President
Franklin  Roosevelt’s  pledge  to  supply  the  Allies  with
materiel. To avoid a divisive protest, FDR issued Exec-
utive Order 8802 in June of that year, prohibiting racial
discrimination  in  defense  industries,  and  Randolph
agreed to cancel the march. The resulting Fair Employ-
ment Practices Commission (FEPC) had few enforce-
ment powers, but it set an important precedent: federal
action.  Randolph’s  efforts  showed  that  white  leaders
and institutions could be swayed by concerted African
American action. It  would be a critical lesson for the
movement.

The Double V Campaign  A second strategy jumped
from  the  pages  of  the  Pittsburgh  Courier,  one  of  the
foremost African American newspapers of the era. It
was  the  brainchild  of  an  ordinary  cafeteria  worker
from  Kansas.  In  a  1942  letter  to  the  editor,  James  G.
Thompson  urged  that  “colored  Americans  adopt  the
double  VV  for  a  double  victory” — victory  over  fas-
cism  abroad  and  victory  over  racism  at  home.  Edgar
Rouzeau, editor of the paper’s New York office, agreed:
“Black America must fight two wars and win in both.”
Instantly dubbed the Double V Campaign, Thompson’s
notion,  with  Rouzeau’s  backing,  spread  like  wildfire
through black communities across the country. African
Americans  would  demonstrate  their  loyalty  and  citi-
zenship  by  fighting  the  Axis  powers.  But  they  would
also demand, peacefully but emphatically, the defeat of
racism at home. “The suffering and privation may be
great,” Rouzeau told his readers, “but the rewards loom
even greater.”

The Double V efforts met considerable resistance.
In  war  industries,  factories  periodically  shut  down
in  Chicago,  Baltimore,  Philadelphia,  and  other  cities
because of “hate strikes”: the refusal of white workers
to  labor  alongside  black  workers.  Detroit  was  espe-
cially tense. Referring to the potential for racial strife,
Life  magazine  reported  in  1942  that  “Detroit  is
Dynamite. . . . It can either blow up Hitler or blow up
America.” In 1943, it nearly did the latter. On a hot sum-
mer  day,  whites  from  the  city’s  ethnic  neighborhoods

Wartime Workers

During World War II, hundreds of thousands of black migrants
left the South, bound for large cities in the North and West.
There, they found jobs such as the welding work done by
these African American women at the Landers, Frary, and
Clark plant in New Britain, Connecticut. Fighting employ-
ment discrimination during the war represented one of
the earliest phases in the long struggle against racial seg-
regation in the United States. Library of Congress.

taunted  and  beat  African  Americans  in  a  local  park.
Three  days  of  rioting  ensued  in  which  thirty-four
people were killed, twenty-five of them black. Federal
troops were called in to restore order.

Despite and because of such incidents, a generation
was spurred into action during the war years. In New
York  City,  employment  discrimination  on  the  city’s
transit lines prompted one of the first bus boycotts in
the nation’s history, led in 1941 by
Harlem  minister  Adam  Clayton
Powell  Jr.  In  Chicago,  James
Farmer and three other members
of the Fellowship of Reconciliation
(FOR),  a  nonviolent  peace  orga-
nization,  founded  the  Congress
of  Racial  Equality  (CORE)  in  1942.  FOR  and  CORE
adopted  the  philosophy  of  nonviolent  direct  action
espoused by Mahatma Gandhi of India. Another FOR
member  in  New  York,  Bayard  Rustin,  was  equally
instrumental in promoting direct action; he led one of

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
Why did World War II play
such a critical role in the
civil rights movement?

