874

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

the  earliest  challenges  to  southern  segregation,  the
1947  Journey  of  Recon ciliation.  Meanwhile,  after  the
war, hundreds of thousands of African American vet-
erans used the GI Bill to go to college, trade school, or
graduate  school,  placing  themselves  in  a  position  to
push  against  segregation.  At  the  war’s  end,  Powell
affirmed that “the black man . . . is ready to throw him-
self  into  the  struggle  to  make  the  dream  of  America
become flesh and blood, bread and butter.”

Cold War Civil Rights
Demands for justice persisted in the early years of the
Cold War. African American efforts were propelled by
symbolic  victories — as  when  Jackie  Robinson  broke
through  the  color  line  in  major  league  baseball  by

joining the Brooklyn Dodgers in 1947 — but the grow-
ing black vote in northern cities proved more decisive.
During  World  War  II,  more  than  a  million  African
Americans  migrated  to  northern  and  western  cities,
where  they  joined  the  Democratic  Party  of  Franklin
Roosevelt  and  the  New  Deal  (Map  27.1).  This  new-
found  political  leverage  awakened  northern  liberals,
many of whom became allies of civil rights advocates.
Ultimately,  the  Cold  War  produced  mixed  results,  as
the  nation’s  commitment  to  anticommunism  opened
some avenues for civil rights while closing others.

Civil Rights and the New Deal Coalition  African
American leaders were uncertain what to expect from
President Truman, inheritor of the New Deal coalition
but  not  opposed  to  using  racist  language  himself.

Seattle

Portland

WA

OR

ID

San Francisco

NV

UT

CA

Los Angeles

AZ

PACIFIC
OCEAN

MT

WY

CO

NM

C A N A D A

ND

SD

MN

WI

NE

IA

Chicago

ME

NY

VT

NH

MA

CT

RI

New York

NJ

Philadelphia

MD

DE

MI

Detroit

Cleveland

OH

PA

IN

IL

8
1
0,0
0
0

KY

TN

1.
7
M
I
L
L
O
N

I

0
0
0
,
0
5
8

N
O
I
L
L
M
8
1

I

.

MS

AL

GA

KS

1 MILLION

OK

TX

MO

5
8
0,0
0
0

AR

LA

WV

VA

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

NC

SC

W

N

S

E

0

0

150

300 miles

150

300 kilometers

FL

African American migration

M E X I C O

Gulf of Mexico

White migration

MAP 27.1
Internal Migrations

The migration of African Americans from the South to other regions of the country produced
one of the most remarkable demographic shifts of the mid-twentieth century. Between World
War I — which marked the start of the Great Migration — and the 1970s, more than 6 million
Afri can Americans left the South. Where they settled in the North and West, they helped
change the politics of entire cities and even states. Seeking black votes, which had become
a key to victory in major cities, liberal Democrats and Republicans alike in New York, Illinois,
California, and Pennsylvania, for instance, increasingly made civil rights part of their platform.
In this way, migration advanced the political cause of black equality.

