CHAPTER 27

  Walking into Freedom Land: The Civil Rights Movement, 1941–1973

875

Though he did not immediately support social equality
for African Americans, Truman supported civil rights
because  he  believed  in  equality  before  the  law.
Moreover,  he  understood  the  growing  importance  of
the small but often decisive black vote in key northern
states  such  as  New  York,  Illinois,  Pennsylvania,  and
Michigan.  Civil  rights  activists  Randolph  and
Powell — along with vocal white liberals such as Hubert
Humphrey, the mayor of Minneapolis, and members of
Americans  for  Democratic  Action  (ADA),  a  liberal
organization — pressed Truman to act.

With  no  support  for  civil  rights  in  Congress,
Truman  turned  to  executive  action.  In  1946,  he
appointed the Presidential Committee on Civil Rights,
whose 1947 report, “To Secure These Rights,” called for
robust  federal  action  to  ensure  equality  for  African
Americans.  With  the  report  fresh  in  his  mind,  in
1948 Truman issued an executive order desegregating
employment  in  federal  agencies  and,  under  pressure
from Randolph’s Committee Against Jim Crow in Mil-
itary Service, desegregated the armed forces. Truman
then sent a message to Congress asking that all of the
report’s recommendations — including the abolition of
poll taxes and the restoration of the Fair Employment
Practices Commission — be made into law. It  was the
most  aggressive,  and  politically  bold,  call  for  racial
equality by the leader of a major political party since
Reconstruction.

Truman’s  boldness  was  too  much  for  southern
Democrats. Under the leadership of Strom Thurmond,
governor  of  South  Carolina,  white  Democrats  from
the South formed the States’ Rights Democratic Party,
known popularly as the Dixiecrats, for the 1948 elec-
tion (Chapter 25). This brought into focus an internal
struggle developing within the Democratic Party and
its still-formidable New Deal coalition. Would the civil
rights aims of the party’s liberal wing alienate southern
white Democrats, as well as many suburban whites in
the North? It was the first hint of the discord that would
eventually divide the Democratic Party in the 1960s.

Race  and Anticommunism  The  Cold  War  shaped
civil  rights  in  both  positive  and  negative  terms.  In  a
time  of  growing  fear  of  communist  expansionism,
Truman worried about America’s image in the world.
He reminded Americans that when whites and blacks
“fail  to  live  together  in  peace,”  that  failure  hurt  “the
cause of democracy itself in the whole world.” Indeed,
the Soviet Union used American racism as a means of
discrediting  the  United  States  abroad.  “We  cannot
escape the fact that our civil rights record has been an
issue in world politics,” the Committee on Civil Rights

wrote. International tensions between the United States
and the Soviet Union thus appeared to strengthen the
hand of civil rights leaders, because America needed to
demonstrate to the rest of the world that its race rela-
tions were improving (America Compared, p. 876).

However,  the  Cold  War  strengthened  one  hand
while weakening the other. McCarthyism and the hunt
for subversives at home held the civil rights movement
back.  Civil  rights  opponents  charged  that  racial  inte-
gration  was  “communistic,”  and  the  NAACP  was
banned in many southern states as an “anti-American”
organization.  Black  Americans
who spoke favorably of the Soviet
Union,  such  as  the  actor  and
singer Paul Robeson, or had been
“fellow  travelers”  in  the  1930s,
such as the pacifist Bayard Rustin,
were persecuted. Robeson, whose
career  was  destroyed  by  such
accusations,  told  House  Un-American  Activities
Committee  (HUAC)  interrogators,  “My  father  was  a
slave,  and  my  people  died  to  build  this  country,  and
I  am  going  to . . . have  a  part  of  it  just  like  you.”  The
fate of people like Robeson showed that the Cold War
could work against the civil rights cause just as easily as
for it.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
How did the Cold War
work in the favor of civil
rights? How did it work
against the movement?

Mexican Americans and
Japanese Americans
African Americans were the most prominent, but not
the only, group in American society to organize against
racial  injustice  in  the  1940s.  In  the  Southwest,  from
Texas to California, Mexican immigrants and Mexican
Americans  endured  a  “caste”  system  not  unlike  the
Jim Crow system in the South. In Texas, for instance,
poll taxes kept most Mexican American citizens from
voting.  Decades  of  discrimination  by  employers  in
agriculture  and  manufacturing — made  possible  by
the  constant  supply  of  cheap  labor  from  across  the
border — suppressed  wages  and  kept  the  majority  of
Mexican Americans barely above poverty. Many lived
in colonias or barrios, neighborhoods separated from
Anglos and often lacking sidewalks, reliable electricity
and water, and public services.

Developments within the Mexican American com-
munity set the stage for fresh challenges to these con-
ditions in the 1940s. Labor activism in the 1930s and
1940s,  especially  in  Congress  of  Industrial  Organ iza-
tions  (CIO)  unions  with  large  numbers  of  Mexican
Americans,  improved  wages  and  working  conditions
in some industries and produced a new generation of

