A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Freedom in the United

States and Africa

Hailou Wolde-Giorghis

Hailou  Wolde-Giorghis  was  an  Ethiopian  student  who
visited  the  United  States  at  the  invitation  of  the  State
Department in the early 1960s.

“Negroes are dirty,” say the whites, but in nearly all res-
taurants I saw Negro waiters and cooks. “They’re lazy”: I
noticed that it is the Negro who does the hardest manual
work. They are said to be uncultivated and are therefore
denied access to culture. As George Bernard Shaw said,
“The haughty American nation makes the Negro shine
its shoes, and then demonstrates his physical and mental
inferiority by the fact that he is a shoe-cleaner.” . . .

What is known as integration in the South is the abil-
ity of a Negro to enter a shop and buy a record, or the fact
that, of ten thousand students enrolled in a university,
two of them are Negroes. “A miracle!” they cry. Real inte-
gration, however, does not exist, not even in the North,
and by real integration I mean interracial communica-
tion, complete equality in the strict sense of the word. Still
another example drawn from the South: the manager of a
television studio told me in frigid terms that he would not
hire Negroes; there would be a scandal and all his spon-
sors would protest.

Source: Hailou Wolde-Giorghis, “My Encounters with Racism in the United States,” in
Views of America, ed. Alan F. Westin et al. (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World,
1966), 228–231.

that after revolt is over we can live with people as their
brothers and sisters.

Source: Martin Luther King Jr., “The Birth of a New Nation,” Liberation 28 (April
1957).

Kwame Nkrumah

Kwame Nkrumah was the ﬁrst president of the indepen-
dent nation of Ghana. In the 1930s and 1940s, Nkrumah
studied  in  the  United  States,  earning  degrees  at  Lincoln
University and the University of Pennsylvania.

The “wind of change” has become a raging hurricane,
sweeping away the old colonialist Africa. The year 1960
was Africa’s year. In that year alone, seventeen African
States emerged as proud and independent sovereign
nations. Now the ultimate freedom of the whole of
Africa can no more be in doubt.

For centuries, Europeans dominated the African con-

tinent. The white man arrogated to himself the right to
rule and to be obeyed by the non-white. . . .

All this makes a sad story, but now we must be pre-
pared to bury the past with its unpleasant memories and
look to the future. All we ask of the former colonial pow-
ers is their goodwill and cooperation to remedy past
mistakes and injustices and to grant independence to
the colonies in Africa.

Martin Luther King Jr.

Here, the American civil rights leader celebrates the inde-
pendence of the African nation of Ghana in 1957.

And it’s a beautiful thing, isn’t it that . . . [Ghana] is now
free and is free without rising up with arms and ammuni-
tion. It is free through nonviolent means. Because of that
the British Empire will not have the bitterness for Ghana
that she has for China, so to speak. Because of that when
the British Empire leaves Ghana she leaves with a differ-
ent attitude than she would have left with if she had been
driven out by armies. We’ve got to revolt in such a way

Source: Kwame Nkrumah, I Speak of Freedom: A Statement of African Ideology (New
York: Praeger, 1961), ix.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Wolde-Giorghis is especially critical of southern “integra-
tion.” As an African, what kind of perspective would he
bring to this question?

2.  What values and goals do King and Nkrumah seem to

share? How were their circumstances and goals different?

3.  Compare the circumstances of African Americans in the
United States and Africans in nations colonized by Euro-
peans. What were the similarities and differences?

876

