CHAPTER 27

  Walking into Freedom Land: The Civil Rights Movement, 1941–1973

877

Both  groups  arose  to  address
specific  local  injustices  (such  as
the segregation of military ceme-
teries),  but  they  quickly  broad-
ened  their  scope  to  encompass
political and economic justice for
the larger community. Among the
first  young  activists  to  work  for
the  CSO  were  Cesar  Chavez  and
Dolores  Huerta,  who  would  later  found  the  United
Farm Workers (UFW) and inspire the Chicano move-
ment of the 1960s.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How were the circum-
stances facing Mexican
and Japanese Americans
similar to those facing
African Americans? How
were they different?

Activists also pushed for legal change. In 1947, five
Mexican  American  fathers  in  California  sued  a  local
school  district  for  placing  their  children  in  separate
“Mexican”  schools.  The  case,  Mendez  v.  Westminster
School  District,  never  made  it  to  the  U.S.  Supreme
Court. But the Ninth Circuit Court ruled such segrega-
tion unconstitutional, laying the legal groundwork for
broader  challenges  to  racial  inequality.  Among  those
filing  briefs  in  the  case  was  the  NAACP’s  Thurgood
Marshall, who was then developing the legal strategy to
strike at racial segregation in the South. In another sig-
nificant  legal  victory,  the  Supreme  Court  ruled  in
1954 — just  two  weeks  before  the  landmark  Brown  v.
Board of Education decision — that Mexican Americans
constituted  a  “distinct  class”  that  could  claim  protec-
tion from discrimination.

Also  on  the  West  Coast,  Japanese  Americans
accelerated  their  legal  challenge  to  discrimination.
Unde terred  by  rulings  in  the  Hirabayashi  (1943)  and
Korematsu (1944) cases upholding wartime imprison-
ment  (Chapter  24),  the  Japanese  American  Citizens
League (JACL) filed lawsuits in the late 1940s to regain
property lost during the war. The JACL also challenged
the  constitutionality  of  California’s  Alien  Land  Law,
which  prohibited  Japanese  immigrants  from  owning
land, and successfully lobbied Congress to enable those
same  immigrants  to  become  citizens — a  right  they
were  denied  for  fifty  years.  These  efforts  by  Mexican
and  Japanese  Americans  enlarged  the  sphere  of  civil
rights and laid the foundation for a broader notion of
racial equality in the postwar years.

Fighting for Equality Before the Law
With  civil  rights  legislation  blocked  in  Congress  by
southern  Democrats  throughout  the  1950s,  activists
looked in two different directions for a breakthrough:
to northern state legislatures and to the federal courts.
School  segregation  remained  a  stubborn  problem  in
northern  states,  but  the  biggest  obstacle  to  black

Bracero Worker Card

In the Southwest, Mexican immigrants and many Mexican
Americans encountered a caste system not unlike Jim Crow
segregation. Most of the hardest, lowest-paying work in
states such as Texas, Arizona, and California was performed
by people of Mexican descent. Under a government program,
braceros, or migrant Mexican workers, were allowed into the
United States for a limited time to harvest a variety of fruit
and vegetable crops. A worker card issued to one such
bracero is pictured here. National Museum of American History,
Smithsonian Institution, Behring Center.

leaders.  More  than  400,000  Mexican  Americans  also
served in World War II. Having fought for their coun-
try, many returned to the United States determined to
challenge their second-class citizenship. Additionally, a
new  Mexican  American  middle  class  began  to  take
shape in major cities such as Los Angeles, San Antonio,
El Paso, and Chicago, which, like the African American
middle class, gave leaders and resources to the cause.

In  Texas  and  California,  Mexican  Americans  cre-
ated  new  civil  rights  organizations  in  the  postwar
years. In Corpus Christi, Texas, World War II veterans
founded the American GI Forum in 1948 to protest the
poor  treatment  of  Mexican  American  soldiers  and
veterans.  Activists  in  Los  Angeles  created  the  Com-
munity  Service  Organization  (CSO)  the  same  year.

