878

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

progress there was persistent job and housing discrim-
ination. The states with the largest African American
populations,  and  hence  the  largest  share  of  black
Democratic  Party  voters,  became  testing  grounds  for
state legislation to end such discriminatory practices.

Winning  antidiscrimination  legislation  depended
on coalition politics. African American activists forged
alliances  with  trade  unions  and  liberal  organizations
such  as  the  American  Friends  Service  Committee  (a
Quaker group), among many others. Progress was slow
and often occurred only after long periods of unglam-
orous  struggle  to  win  votes  in  state  capitals  such  as
Albany,  New  York;  Springfield,  Illinois;  and  Lansing,
Michigan. The first fair employment laws had come in
New York and New Jersey in 1945. A decade passed,
however, before other states with significant black pop-
ulations passed similar legislation. Antidiscrimination
laws in housing were even more difficult to pass, with
most progress not coming until the 1960s. These leg-
islative  campaigns  in  northern  states  received  little
national attention, but they were instrumental in laying
the groundwork for legal equality outside the South.

Thurgood  Marshall  Because  the  vast  majority  of
southern  African  Americans  were  prohibited  from
voting, state legislatures there were closed to the kind
of  organized  political  pressure  possible  in  the  North.
Thus activists also looked to federal courts for leverage.
In the late 1930s, NAACP lawyers Thurgood Marshall,
Charles  Hamilton  Houston,  and  William  Hastie  had
begun preparing the legal ground in a series of cases
challenging  racial  discrimination.  The  key  was  prod-
ding  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court  to  use  the  Fourteenth
Amendment’s “equal protection” clause to overturn its
1896 ruling in Plessy v. Ferguson, which upheld racial
segregation under the “separate but equal” doctrine.

Marshall was the great-grandson of slaves. Of mod-
est  origins,  his  parents  instilled  in  him  a  faith  in  law
and the Constitution. After his 1930 graduation from
Lincoln  University,  a  prestigious  African  American
institution near Philadelphia, Marshall applied to the
University of Maryland Law School. Denied admission
because the school did not accept black applicants, he
enrolled at all-black Howard University. There Marshall
met Houston, a law school dean, and the two forged a
friendship  and  intellectual  part-
nership  that  would  change  the
face  of  American  legal  history.
Marshall,  with  Houston’s  and
Hastie’s  critical  strategic  input,
would argue most of the NAACP’s
landmark cases. In the late 1960s,

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did the NAACP go
about developing a legal
strategy to attack racial
segregation?

President Johnson appointed Marshall to the Supreme
Court — the first African American to have that honor.
Marshall, Houston, Hastie, and six other attorneys
filed suit after suit, deliberately selecting each one from
dozens of possibilities. The strategy was slow and time-
consuming, but progress came. In 1936, Marshall and
Hamilton  won  a  state  case  that  forced  the  University
of  Maryland  Law  School  to  admit  qualified  Afri-
can  Americans — a  ruling  of  obvious  significance  to
Marshall. Eight years later, in Smith v. Allwright (1944),
Marshall  convinced  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court  that  all-
white  primaries  were  unconstitutional.  In  1950,  with
Marshall  once  again  arguing  the  case,  the  Supreme
Court ruled in McLaurin v. Oklahoma that universities
could  not  segregate  black  students  from  others  on
campus. None of these cases produced swift changes in
the  daily  lives  of  most  African  Americans,  but  they
confirmed that civil rights attorneys were on the right
track.

Brown v. Board of Education  The NAACP’s legal
strategy  achieved  its  ultimate  validation  in  a  case
involving  Linda  Brown,  a  black  pupil  in  Topeka,
Kansas, who had been forced to attend a distant segre-
gated school rather than the nearby white elementary
school.  In  Brown  v.  Board  of  Education  of  Topeka
(1954),  Marshall  argued  that  such  segregation  was
unconstitutional  because  it  denied  Linda  Brown  the
“equal  protection  of  the  laws”  guaranteed  by  the
Fourteenth Amendment (Map 27.2). In a unanimous
decision on May 17, 1954, the Supreme Court agreed,
overturning  the  “separate  but  equal”  doctrine  at  last.
Writing  for  the  Court,  the  new  chief  justice,  Earl
Warren, wrote: “We conclude that in the field of public
education  the  doctrine  of  ‘separate  but  equal’  has  no
place.  Separate  educational  facilities  are  inherently
unequal.” In an implementing 1955 decision known as
Brown  II,  the  Court  declared  simply  that  integration
should proceed “with all deliberate speed.”

In  the  South,  however,  Virginia  senator  Harry  F.
Byrd  issued  a  call  for  “massive  resistance.”  Calling
May 17 “Black Monday,” the Mississippi segregationist
Tom P. Brady invoked the language of the Cold War to
discredit  the  decision,  assailing  the  “totalitarian  gov-
ernment” that had rendered the decision in the name
of “socialism and communism.” That year, half a mil-
lion southerners joined White Citizens’ Councils dedi-
cated  to  blocking  school  integration.  Some  whites
revived  the  old  tactics  of  violence  and  intimidation,
swelling  the  ranks  of  the  Ku  Klux  Klan  to  levels  not
seen since the 1920s. The “Southern Manifesto,” signed
in 1956 by 101 members of Congress, denounced the

