CHAPTER 27

  Walking into Freedom Land: The Civil Rights Movement, 1941–1973

879

W

N

S

E

Seattle

WA

Hirabayashi v. United States (1943),
U.S. Supreme Court:
Case originated in Seattle, WA.
Outcome: Upheld legality of Japanese
imprisonment during World War II.

C A N A D A

OR

ID

MT

Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954),
U.S. Supreme Court:
ND
Case originated in Topeka, KS.
Outcome: Ruling dismantled “separate
but equal” doctrine in public education
as unconstitutional.

MN

WI

Korematsu v. United States (1944),
U.S. Supreme Court:
Case originated in San Leandro, CA.
Outcome: Reaffirmed Hirabayashi.

WY

NV

UT

CO

SD

NE

Morgan v. Virginia (1946),
U.S. Supreme Court:
Case originated in Gloucester County, VA.
Outcome: Virginia law enforcing segregation
on buses ruled unconstitutional.

MI

IA

Murray v. Pearson (1936),
Maryland Court of Appeals:
Case originated in Baltimore, MD.
Outcome: Segregation state without
separate black law schools forced
to admit qualified candidates
regardless of race.

ME

VT

NH

MA

NY

RI

CT

PA

NJ
Baltimore
MD
DE

San Leandro

CA

PACIFIC
OCEAN

Mendez v. Westminster School District (1947),
U.S. Circuit Court:
Case originated in Orange County, CA.
Outcome: Segregation of Mexican and Mexican
American students ruled unconstitutional.

AZ

NM

McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents (1950),
U.S. Supreme Court:
Case originated in Norman, OK.
Outcome: Racial segregation in law
and graduate schools ruled unconstitutional.

0

0

150

300 miles

150

300 kilometers

M E X I C O

MAP 27.2
Desegregation Court Cases

Topeka

MO

IL

St. Louis

KS

OK

Norman

AR

OH

IN

KY

TN

AL

GA

WV

VA

Loving v. Virginia (1967),
NC
U.S. Supreme Court:
Case originated in Caroline County, VA.
Outcome: Ruled all state laws prohibiting
interracial marriage unconstitutional.

SC

TX

LA

MS

Shelley v. Kraemer (1948),
U.S. Supreme Court:
Case originated in St. Louis, MO.
Outcome: Ruled that racially restrictive
housing covenants are unenforceable.

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

Gulf of Mexico

Smith v. Allwright (1944),
U.S. Supreme Court:
Case originated in Harris County, TX.
Outcome: Ruled that the white
primary was unconstitutional.

FL

Desegregation court battles were not limited to the South. Note the important California
cases regarding Mexican Americans and Japanese Americans. Two seminal decisions, the
1948 housing decision in Shelley v. Kraemer and the 1954 school decision in Brown v. Board
of Education, originated in Missouri and Kansas, respectively. This map helps show that racial
segregation and discrimination were a national, not simply a southern, problem.

Brown decision as “a clear abuse of judicial power” and
encouraged  local  officials  to  defy  it.  The  white  South
had declared all-out war on Brown.

Enforcement of the Supreme Court’s decision was
complicated further by Dwight Eisenhower’s presence
in the White House — the president was no champion
of civil rights. Eisenhower accepted the Brown decision
as the law of the land, but he thought it a mistake. Ike
was especially unhappy about the prospect of commit-
ting federal power to enforce the decision. A crisis in
Little  Rock,  Arkansas,  finally  forced  his  hand.  In
September 1957, when nine black students attempted
to enroll at the all-white Central High School, Governor
Orval  Faubus  called  out  the  National  Guard  to  bar
them. Angry white mobs appeared daily to taunt the
students,  chanting  “Go  back  to  the  jungle.”  As  the
vicious  scenes  played  out  on  television  night  after
night, Eisenhower finally acted. He sent 1,000 federal

troops  to  Little  Rock  and  nationalized  the  Arkansas
National  Guard,  ordering  them  to  protect  the  black
students.  Eisenhower  thus  became  the  first  president
since Reconstruction to use federal troops to enforce
the rights of African Americans. But Little Rock also
showed that southern officials had more loyalty to local
custom  than  to  the  law — a  repeated  problem  in  the
post-Brown era.

Forging a Protest Movement,
1955–1965
Declaring  racial  segregation  integral  to  the  South’s
“habits,  traditions,  and  way  of  life,”  the  Southern
Manifesto signaled that many whites would not accept
African American equality readily. As Americans had

