880

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

The Legal Strategy

On the steps of the Supreme Court, on the
day in 1954 that Brown v. Board of Educa tion
of Topeka was decided, are the architects of
the NAACP legal strategy in the Brown case
and dozens of others. Together (from left
to right), George E. C. Hayes, Thurgood
Marshall, and James M. Nabrit pursued
cases that undermined the constitutional
foundation of racial segregation. Their
efforts were not enough to destroy Jim
Crow, however — that would take marches,
protests, and sacriﬁces from ordinary citi-
zens. AP Images.

witnessed in Little Rock, the unwillingness of local offi-
cials to enforce Brown could render the decision invalid
in practice. If legal victories would not be enough, citi-
zens themselves, black and white, would have to take to
the  streets  and  demand  justice.  Following  the  Brown
decision, they did just that, forging a protest movement
unique in the history of the United States.

Nonviolent Direct Action
Brown had been the law of the land for barely a year
when a single act of violence struck at the heart of black
America. A fourteen-year-old African American from
the  South  Side  of  Chicago,  Emmett  Till,  was  visiting
relatives  in  Mississippi  in  the  summer  of  1955.  Seen
talking to a white woman in a grocery store, Till was
tortured and murdered under cover of night. His muti-
lated body was found at the bottom of a river, tied with
barbed wire to a heavy steel cotton gin fan. Photos of

Till’s body in Jet magazine brought national attention
to the heinous crime.

Two white men were arrested for Till’s murder. Dur-
ing the trial, followed closely in African American com-
munities across the country, the lone witness to Till’s
kidnapping — his  uncle,  Mose  Wright — identified
both  killers.  Feeling  “the  blood  boil  in  hundreds  of
white  people  as  they  sat  glaring  in  the  courtroom,”
Wright said, “it was the first time in my life I had the
courage  to  accuse  a  white  man  of  a  crime.”  Despite
Wright’s eyewitness testimony, the all-white jury found
the  defendants  innocent.  This  miscarriage  of  jus-
tice — later,  the  killers  even  admitted  their  guilt  in  a
Look  magazine  article — galvanized  an  entire  genera-
tion of African Americans; no one who lived through
the Till case ever forgot it.

Montgomery  Bus  Boycott
In the wake of the Till
case,  civil  rights  advocates  needed  some  good  news.

