CHAPTER 27

  Walking into Freedom Land: The Civil Rights Movement, 1941–1973

881

School Desegregation in Little Rock, Arkansas

Less well known than the crisis at Little Rock’s Central High School the same year, the circumstances at
North Little Rock were nonetheless strikingly similar: white resistance to the enrollment of a handful of
black students. In this photograph, white students block the doors of North Little Rock High School, pre-
venting six African American students from entering on September 9, 1957. This photograph is noteworthy
because it shows a striking new feature of southern racial politics: the presence of ﬁlm and television cam-
eras that broadcast these images to the nation and the world. AP Images.

They received it three months later, as southern black
leaders embraced an old tactic put to new ends: nonvi-
olent protest. On December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks, a civil
rights  activist  in  Montgomery,  Alabama,  refused  to
give  up  her  seat  on  a  bus  to  a  white  man.  She  was
arrested and charged with violating a local segregation
ordinance. Parks’s act was not the spur-of-the-moment
decision that it seemed: a woman of sterling reputation
and  a  longtime  NAACP  member,  she  had  been  con-
templating such an act for some time. Middle-aged and
unassuming,  Rosa  Parks  fit  the  bill  perfectly  for  the
NAACP’s challenge against segregated buses.

Once the die was cast, the black community turned
for leadership to the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr.,
the recently appointed pastor of Montgomery’s Dexter
Street Baptist Church. The son of a prominent Atlanta
minister,  King  embraced  the  teachings  of  Mahatma
Gandhi. Working closely, but behind the scenes, with
Bayard  Rustin,  King  studied  nonviolent  philosophy,
in  the  Fellowship  of
which  Rustin  and  others

Reconciliation had first used in the 1940s. After Rosa
Parks’s arrest, King endorsed a plan proposed by a local
black women’s organization to boycott Montgomery’s
bus system. The Montgomery Bus Boycott was inspired
by similar boycotts that had taken place in Harlem in
1941 and Baton Rouge, Louisiana, in 1953.

For  the  next  381  days,  Montgomery’s  African
Ameri cans  formed  car  pools  or  walked  to  work.
“Darling, it’s empty!” Coretta Scott King exclaimed to
her husband as a bus normally filled with black riders
rolled by their living room window on the first day of
the boycott. The transit company neared bankruptcy,
and  downtown  stores  complained  about  the  loss  of
business.  But  only  after  the  Supreme  Court  ruled  in
November 1956 that bus segregation was unconstitu-
tional did the city of Montgomery finally comply. “My
feets  is  tired,  but  my  soul  is  rested,”  said  one  woman
boycotter.

The  Montgomery  Bus  Boycott  catapulted  King  to
national prominence. In 1957, along with the Reverend

