882

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Ralph Abernathy and dozens of black ministers from
across the South, he founded the Atlanta-based South-
ern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). The black
church, long the center of African American social and
cultural  life,  now  lent  its  moral  and  organizational
strength  to  the  civil  rights  movement.  Black  church-
women were a tower of strength, transferring the skills
they had honed during years of church work to the fight
for civil rights. The SCLC quickly joined the NAACP at
the leading edge of the movement for racial justice.

Greensboro  Sit-Ins  The  battle  for  civil  rights
entered  a  new  phase  in  Greensboro,  North  Carolina,
on February 1, 1960, when four black college students
took seats at the whites-only lunch counter at the local
Woolworth’s five-and-dime store. This simple act was
entirely  the  brainchild  of  the  four  students,  who  had
discussed it in their dorm rooms over several preced-
ing  nights.  A  New  York–based  spokesman  for  Wool-
worth’s said the chain would “abide by local custom,”
which  meant  refusing  to  serve  African  Americans  at
the lunch counter. The students were determined to “sit
in” until they were served. For three weeks, hundreds
of  students  inspired  by  the  original  foursome  took
turns sitting at the counters, quietly eating, doing home-
work, or reading. Taunted by groups of whites, pelted
with food and other debris, the black students — often
occupying more than sixty of the sixty-six seats — held
strong. Although many were arrested, the tactic worked:
the Woolworth’s lunch counter was desegregated, and
sit-ins quickly spread to other southern cities (Ameri-
can Voices, p. 884).

Ella Baker and SNCC
Inspired by the developments
in Greensboro and elsewhere, Ella Baker, an adminis-
trator  with  the  SCLC,  helped  organize  the  Student
Nonviolent  Coordinating  Committee  (SNCC,  pro-
nounced  “Snick”)  in  1960  to  facilitate  student  sit-ins.
Rolling like a great wave across the Upper South, from
North Carolina into Virginia, Maryland, and Tennes-
see, by the end of the year students had launched sit-ins
in 126 cities. More than 50,000 people participated, and
3,600 were jailed. The sit-ins drew African American
college students into the movement in significant num-
bers for the first time. Northern students formed soli-
darity  committees  and  raised  money  for  bail.  SNCC
quickly emerged as the most important student protest
organization in the country and inspired a generation
of students on college campuses across the nation.

Baker  took  a  special  interest  in  these  students,
because  she  found  them  receptive  to  her  notion  of

Ella Baker

Born in Virginia and educated at Shaw University in Raleigh,
North Carolina, Ella Baker was one of the foremost theorists
of grassroots, participatory democracy in the United States.
Active all her life in the black freedom movement, in 1960
Baker cofounded the Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee (SNCC). Her advocacy of leadership by ordinary,
nonelite people often led her to disagree with the top-down
movement strategy of Martin Luther King Jr. and other minis-
ters of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC).
AP Images.

participatory democracy. The granddaughter of slaves,
Baker had moved to Harlem in the 1930s, where she
worked for New Deal agencies and then the NAACP.
She believed in nurturing leaders from the grass roots,
encouraging  ordinary  people  to  stand  up  for  their
rights  rather  than  to  depend  on  charismatic  figure-
heads. “My theory is, strong people don’t need strong
leaders,” she once said. Nonetheless, Baker nurtured a
generation  of  young  activists  in  SNCC,  including
Stokely  Carmichael,  Anne  Moody,  John  Lewis,  and
Diane Nash, who went on to become some of the most
important civil rights leaders in the United States.

Freedom  Rides  Emboldened by SNCC’s sit-in tac-
tics, in 1961 the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)
organized a series of what were called Freedom Rides

