CHAPTER 27

  Walking into Freedom Land: The Civil Rights Movement, 1941–1973

883

on interstate bus lines throughout the South. The aim
was  to  call  attention  to  blatant  violations  of  recent
Supreme  Court  rulings  against  segregation  in  inter-
state commerce. The activists who signed on — mostly
young,  both  black  and  white — knew  that  they  were
taking their lives in their hands. They found courage in
song, as civil rights activists had begun to do across the
country, with lyrics such as “I’m taking a ride on the
Greyhound bus line. . . . Hallelujah, I’m traveling down
freedom’s main line!”

Courage  they  needed.  Club-wielding  Klansmen
attacked the buses when they stopped in small towns.
Outside Anniston, Alabama, one bus was firebombed;
the  Freedom  Riders  escaped  only  moments  before
it  exploded.  Some  riders  were  then  brutally  beaten.
Freedom Riders and news reporters were also viciously
attacked by Klansmen in Birmingham and Montgom-
ery.  Despite  the  violence,  state  authorities  refused
to  intervene.  “I  cannot  guarantee  protection  for  this
bunch  of  rabble  rousers,”  declared  Governor  John
Patterson of Alabama.

Once again, local officials’ refusal to enforce the law
left  the  fate  of  the  Freedom  Riders  in  Washington’s
hands. The new president, John F. Kennedy, was cau-
tious  about  civil  rights.  Despite  a  campaign  commit-
ment, he failed to deliver on a civil rights bill. Elected
by  a  thin  margin,  Kennedy  believed  that  he  could  ill
afford to lose the support of powerful southern sena-
tors. But civil rights was unlike other domestic issues.
Its  fate  was  going  to  be  decided  not  in  the  halls  of
Congress, but on the streets of southern cities. Although
President  Kennedy  discouraged  the  Freedom  Rides,
beatings  shown  on  the  nightly  news  forced  Attorney
General Robert Kennedy to dispatch federal marshals.
Civil rights activists thus learned the value of nonvio-
lent protest that provoked violent white resistance.

The  victories  so  far  had  been  limited,  but  the
groundwork  had  been  laid  for  a  civil rights  offensive
that  would  transform  the  nation.  The  NAACP’s  legal
strategy had been followed closely by the emergence of
a major protest movement. And now civil rights lead-
ers focused their attention on Congress.

Legislating Civil Rights, 1963–1965
The first civil rights law in the nation’s history came in
1866 just after the Civil War. Its provisions were long
ignored (Chapter 15). A second law was passed during
Reconstruction in 1875, but it was declared unconsti-
tutional by the Supreme Court. For nearly ninety years,
new civil rights legislation was blocked or filibustered

by  southern  Democrats  in  Con-
gress.  Only  a  weak,  largely  sym-
bolic  act  was  passed  in  1957
during  the  Eisenhower  adminis-
tration.  But  by  the  early  1960s,
with  legal  precedents  in  their
favor and nonviolent protest awak-
ening the nation, civil rights lead-
ers  believed  the  time  had  come  for  a  serious  civil
rights  bill.  The  challenge  was  getting  one  through  a
still-reluctant Congress.

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
What lessons did activists
learn from the evolution
of the civil rights move-
ment between 1957 and
1961?

The Battle for Birmingham  The road to such a bill
began when Martin Luther King Jr. called for demon-
strations  in  “the  most  segregated  city  in  the  United
States”:  Birmingham,  Alabama.  King  and  the  SCLC
needed a concrete victory in Birmingham to validate
their strategy of nonviolent protest. In May 1963, thou-
sands of black marchers tried to picket Birmingham’s
department  stores.  Eugene  “Bull”  Connor,  the  city’s
public  safety  commissioner,  ordered  the  city’s  police
troops to meet the marchers with violent force: snarl-
ing  dogs,  electric  cattle  prods,  and  high-pressure  fire
hoses.  Television  cameras  captured  the  scene  for  the
evening news.

While serving a jail sentence for leading the march,
King, scribbling in pencil on any paper he could find,
composed one of the classic documents of nonviolent
direct  action:  “Letter  from  Birmingham  Jail.”  “Why
direct  action?”  King  asked.  “There  is  a  type  of  con-
structive,  nonviolent  tension  that  is  necessary  for
growth.” The civil rights movement sought, he contin-
ued, “to create such a crisis and establish such a creative
tension.” Grounding his actions in equal parts Christian
brotherhood  and  democratic  liberalism,  King  argued
that Americans confronted a moral choice: they could
“preserve  the  evil  system  of  segregation”  or  take  the
side of “those great wells of democracy . . . the Consti-
tution and the Declaration of Independence.”

Outraged  by  the  brutality  in  Birmingham  and
embarrassed  by  King’s  imprisonment  for  leading  a
nonviolent march, President Kennedy decided that it
was time to act. On June 11, 1963, after newly elected
Alabama  governor  George  Wallace  barred  two  black
students from the state university, Kennedy denounced
racism on national television and promised a new civil
rights  bill.  Many  black  leaders  felt  Kennedy’s  action
was  long  overdue,  but  they  nonetheless  hailed  this
“Second  Emancipation  Proclamation.”  That  night,
Medgar Evers, president of the Mississippi chapter of
the  NAACP,  was  shot  in  the  back  in  his  driveway  in

