A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Challenging White

Supremacy

Among  the  many  challenges  historians  face  is  ﬁguring  out  the  processes  by
which long-oppressed ordinary people ﬁnally rise up and demand justice. Dur-
ing  the  1950s,  a  liberating  process  was  quietly  under  way  among  southern
blacks, bursting forth dramatically in the Montgomery Bus Boycott of 1955 and
then, by the end of the decade, emerging across the South. Here are excerpts of
the  testimony  of  two  individuals  who  stepped  forward  and  took  the  lead  in
those struggles.

Franklin McCain
Desegregating Lunch Counters

Franklin McCain was one of the four African American stu-
dents at North Carolina A&T College in Greensboro, North
Carolina, who sat down at the Woolworth’s lunch counter
on February 1, 1960, setting off a wave of student sit-ins
that rocked the South and helped initiate a national civil
rights  movement.  In  the  following  interview,  McCain
describes  how  he  and  his  friends  took  that  momentous
step.

The planning process was on a Sunday night, I remem-
ber it quite well. I think it was Joseph who said, “It’s
time that we take some action now. We’ve been getting
together, and we’ve been, up to this point, still like most
people we’ve talked about for the past few weeks or so —
that is, people who talk a lot but, in fact, make very little
action.” After selecting the technique, then we said, “Let’s
go down and just ask for service.” It certainly wasn’t titled
a “sit-in” or “sit-down” at that time. “Let’s just go down to
Woolworth’s tomorrow and ask for service, and the tactic
is going to be simply this: we’ll just stay there.”

. . . Once getting there . . . we did make purchases
of school supplies and took the patience and time to get
receipts for our purchases, and Joseph and myself went
over to the counter and asked to be served coffee and
doughnuts. As anticipated, the reply was, “I’m sorry,
we don’t serve you here.” And of course we said, “We
just beg to disagree with you. We’ve in fact already
been served.” . . . The attendant or waitress was a little
bit dumbfounded, just didn’t know what to say under
circumstances like that. . . .

At that point there was a policeman who had walked
in off the street, who was pacing the aisle . . . behind us,
where we were seated, with his club in his hand, just sort
of knocking it in his hand, and just looking mean and
red and a little bit upset and a little bit disgusted. And
you had the feeling that he didn’t know what the hell to
do. . . . Usually his defense is offense, and we’ve provoked
him, yes, but we haven’t provoked outwardly enough for

884

him to resort to violence. And I think this is just killing
him; you can see it all over him.

If it’s possible to know what it means to have your
soul cleansed — I felt pretty clean at that time. I probably
felt better on that day than I’ve ever felt in my life. Seems
like a lot of feelings of guilt or what-have-you suddenly
left me, and I felt as though I had gained my manhood. . . .
Not Franklin McCain only as an individual, but I felt as
though the manhood of a number of other black persons
had been restored and had gotten some respect from just
that one day.

The movement started out as a movement of nonvio-
lence and a Christian movement. . . . It was a movement
that was seeking justice more than anything else and not
a movement to start a war. . . .We knew that probably the
most powerful and potent weapon that people have liter-
ally no defense for is love, kindness. That is, whip the
enemy with something that he doesn’t understand. . . .
The individual who had probably the most influence on
us was Gandhi. . . . Yes, Martin Luther King’s name was
well-known when the sit-in movement was in effect,
but . . . no, he was not the individual we had upmost
in mind when we started the sit-in movement.

Source: My Soul Is Rested by Howell Raines, copyright 1977 Howell Raines. Used by
permission of G. P. Putnam’s Sons, a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc. and Russell
& Volkening as agents for the author.

John McFerren
Demanding the Right to Vote

In this interview, given about ten years after the events he
describes, John McFerren tells of the battle he undertook
in 1959 to gain the vote for the blacks of Fayette County,
Tennessee.  By  the  time  of  the  interview,  McFerren  had
risen in life and become a grocery-store owner and prop-
erty  holder,  thanks,  he  says,  to  the  economic  boycott
imposed on him by angry whites. Unlike Greensboro, the
struggle in Fayette County never made national headlines.
It was just one of many local struggles that signaled the
beginning of a new day in the South.

