My name is John McFerren. I’m forty-six years old. I’m a
Negro was born and raised in West Tennessee, the county
of Fayette, District 1. My foreparents was brought here
from North Carolina five years before the Civil War . . .
because the rumor got out among the slaveholders that
West Tennessee was still goin to be a slaveholdin state.
And my people was brought over here and sold. And
after the Civil War my people settled in West Tennessee.
That’s why Fayette and Haywood counties have a great
number of Negroes.

Back in 1957 and ’58 there was a Negro man accused

of killin a deputy sheriff. This was Burton Dodson. He
was brought back after he’d been gone twenty years. J. F.
Estes was the lawyer defendin him. Myself and him both
was in the army together. And the stimulation from the
trial got me interested in the way justice was bein used.
The only way to bring justice would be through the
ballot box.

In 1959 we got out a charter called the Fayette County

Civic and Welfare League. Fourteen of us started out in
that charter. We tried to support a white liberal candidate
that was named L. T. Redfearn in the sheriff election and
the local Democrat party refused to let Negroes vote.

We brought a suit against the Democrat party and
I went to Washington for a civil-rights hearing. Myself
and Estes and Harpman Jameson made the trip. It took
us twenty-two hours steady drivin. . . . I was lookin all
up — lotsa big, tall buildins. I had never seen old, tall
buildins like that before. After talkin to [John Doar] we
come on back to the Justice Department building and we
sat out in the hall while he had a meetin inside the attor-
ney general’s office. And when they come out they told
us they was gonna indict the landowners who kept us
from voting. . . .

Just after that, in 1960, in January, we organized a
thousand Negroes to line up at the courthouse to register
to vote. We started pourin in with big numbers — in this
county it was 72 percent Negroes — when we started to
register to vote to change the situation.

In the followin . . . October and November they
started puttin our people offa the land. Once you regis-
tered you had to move. Once you registered they took
your job. Then after they done that, in November, we had
three hundred people forced to live in tents on Shepard
Towles’s land. And when we started puttin em in tents,

then that’s when the White Citizens Council and the Ku
Klux Klan started shootin in the tents to run us out.

Tent City was parta an economic squeeze. The local

merchants run me outa the stores and said I went to
Washington and caused this mess to start. . . . They had a
blacklist . . . And they had the list sent around to all mer-
chants. Once you registered you couldn’t buy for credit or
cash. But the best thing in the world was when they run
me outa them stores. It started me thinkin for myself. . . .
The southern white has a slogan: “Keep em niggers
happy and keep em singin in the schools.” And the biggest
mistake of the past is that the Negro has not been teached
economics and the value of a dollar. . . . Back at one time
we had a teacher . . . from Mississippi — and he pulled up
and left the county because he was teachin the Negroes to
buy land, and own land, and work it for hisself, and the
county Board of Education didn’t want that taught in the
county.

And they told him, “Keep em niggers singin and keep
em happy and don’t teach em nothin.” . . . You cannot be
free when you’re beggin the man for bread. But when you’ve
got the dollar in your pocket and then got the vote in your
pocket, that’s the only way to be free. . . . And I have been
successful and made good progress because I could see
the only way I could survive is to stay independent.

. . . The Negro is no longer goin back. He’s goin forward.

Source: From Looking for America, second edition, 2 volumes, edited by Stanley I. Kutler
(New York: Norton, 1979). Reprinted with permission of Stanley Kutler.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  McCain took a stand on segregated lunch counters.

McFerren took a stand on the right to vote. How did
these targets represent two different goals of the civil
rights movement?

2.  McCain speaks of the sense of “manhood” he felt as he
sat at that Woolworth’s counter. What does his personal
feeling suggest about the civil rights movement as a
whole?

3.  Almost certainly, McCain and McFerren never met. Sup-
pose they had. What would they have had in common?
Would what they had in common have been more
important than what separated them?

4.  McCain speaks knowingly of the ﬁgures and ideas that
inﬂuenced him. Why do you suppose McFerren is silent
about such matters?

885

