886

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

The Battle of Birmingham

One of the hardest-fought desegregation struggles of the early 1960s took place in April and May 1963 in
Birmingham, Alabama. In response to the daily rallies and peaceful protests, authorities cracked down, arrest-
ing hundreds. They also employed tactics such as those shown here, turning ﬁre hoses on young, nonviolent
student demonstrators and using police dogs to intimidate peaceful marchers. These protests, led by Martin
Luther King Jr. and broadcast on television news, prompted President Kennedy to introduce a civil rights bill
in Congress in June 1963. © Bob Adelman/Corbis.

Jackson  by  a  white  supremacist.  Evers’s  martyrdom
became a spur to further action (Map 27.3).

The  March  on  Washington  and  the  Civil  Rights
Act  To  marshal  support  for  Kennedy’s  bill,  civil
rights leaders adopted a tactic that A. Philip Randolph
had first advanced in 1941: a massive demonstration in
Washington.  Under  the  leadership  of  Randolph  and
Bayard  Rustin,  thousands  of  volunteers  across  the
country  coordinated  car  pools,  “freedom  buses,”  and
“freedom trains,” and on August 28, 1963, delivered a
quarter of a million people to the Lincoln Memorial for
the officially named March on Washington for Jobs and
Freedom (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 888).

Although  other  people  did  the  planning,  Martin
Luther King Jr. was the public face of the march. It was
King’s  dramatic  “I  Have  a  Dream”  speech,  beginning
with his admonition that too many black people lived
“on  a  lonely  island  of  poverty”  and  ending  with  the
exclamation from a traditional black spiritual — “Free

at last! Free at last! Thank God almighty, we are free at
last!” — that  captured  the  nation’s  imagination.  The
sight of 250,000 blacks and whites marching solemnly
together marked the high point of the civil rights move-
ment  and  confirmed  King’s  position  as  the  leading
spokesperson for the cause.

To  have  any  chance  of  getting  the  civil  rights  bill
through Congress, King, Randolph, and Rustin knew
they had to sustain this broad coalition of blacks and
whites. They could afford to alienate no one. Reflecting
a  younger,  more  militant  set  of  activists,  however,
SNCC member John Lewis had prepared a more pro-
vocative speech for that afternoon. Lewis wrote, “The
time will come when we will not confine our marching
to  Washington.  We  will  march  through  the  South,
through  the  Heart  of  Dixie,  the  way  Sherman  did.”
Signaling  a  growing  restlessness  among  black  youth,
Lewis  warned:  “We  shall  fragment  the  South  into  a
thousand pieces and put them back together again in
the  image  of  democracy.”  Fearing  the  speech  would

