T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Civil Rights and

Black Power: Strategy

The  documents  collected  below  reveal  the  range  of  perspectives  and  ideas  at
work within the broad civil rights, or “black freedom,” struggle in the 1960s.

and Ideology

1.  Martin Luther King Jr., “If the Negro Wins, Labor
Wins” speech, 1962. King, speaking to a meeting
of the nation’s trade union leaders, explained the
economic objectives of the black freedom struggle.

If we do not advance, the crushing burden of centuries
of neglect and economic deprivation will destroy our
will, our spirits and our hopes. In this way labor’s his-
toric tradition of moving forward to create vital people
as consumers and citizens has become our own tradition,
and for the same reasons.

This unity of purpose is not an historical coincidence.

Negroes are almost entirely a working people. There are
pitifully few Negro millionaires and few Negro employers.
Our needs are identical with labor’s needs: decent wages,
fair working conditions, livable housing, old age security,
health and welfare measures, conditions in which families
can grow, have education for their children and respect
in the community. That is why Negroes support labor’s
demands and fight laws which curb labor. . . .

The two most dynamic and cohesive liberal forces
in the country are the labor movement and the Negro
freedom movement. Together we can be architects of
democracy in a South now rapidly industrializing.

2.  Police in Birmingham, Alabama, use trained
German shepherds against peaceful African
American protesters, 1963.

Bill Hudson / AP Images.

888

3.  Bayard Rustin, “From Protest to Politics,”

Commentary, February 1965.

. . . it would be hard to quarrel with the assertion that
the elaborate legal structure of segregation and discrimi-
nation, particularly in relation to public accommodations,
has virtually collapsed. On the other hand, without making
light of the human sacrifices involved in the direct-action
tactics (sit-ins, freedom rides, and the rest) that were so
instrumental to this achievement, we must recognize
that in desegregating public accommodations, we
affected institutions which are relatively peripheral
both to the American socio-economic order and to
the fundamental conditions of life of the Negro people.
In a highly-industrialized, 20th-century civilization, we
hit Jim Crow precisely where it was most anachronistic,
dispensable, and vulnerable — in hotels, lunch counters,
terminals, libraries, swimming pools, and the like. . . . At
issue, after all, is not civil rights, strictly speaking, but
social and economic conditions.

4.  James Farmer, Freedom, When?, 1965.

“But when will the demonstrations end?” The perpetual
question. And a serious question. Actually, it is several
questions, for the meaning of the question differs,
depending upon who asks it.

Coming from those whose dominant consideration
is peace — public peace and peace of mind — the question
means: “When are you going to stop tempting violence
and rioting?” Some put it more strongly: “When are you
going to stop sponsoring violence?” Assumed is the nec-
essary connection between demonstration and violence. . . .
“Isn’t the patience of the white majority wearing thin?
Why nourish the displeasure of 90 percent of the popula-
tion with provocative demonstrations? Remember, you
need allies.” And the assumptions of these Cassandras
of the backlash is that freedom and equality are, in the
last analysis, wholly gifts in the white man’s power to
bestow. . . .

What the public must realize is that in a demonstra-
tion more things are happening, at more levels of human
activity, than meets the eye. Demonstrations in the last

