few years have provided literally millions of Negroes with
their first taste of self-determination and political self-
expression.

5.  Stokely Carmichael and Charles Hamilton, Black

Power: The Politics of Liberation in America, 1967.

Black people must redefine themselves, and only they
can do that. Throughout this country, vast segments of
the black communities are beginning to recognize the
need to assert their own definitions, to reclaim their
history, their culture; to create their own sense of com-
munity and togetherness. There is a growing resentment
of the word “Negro,” for example, because this term is the
invention of our oppressor; it is his image of us that he
describes. . . .

The concept of Black Power rests on a fundamental

premise: Before a group can enter the open society, it
must first close ranks. By this we mean that group soli-
darity is necessary before a group can operate effectively
from a bargaining position of strength in a pluralistic
society.

6.  Black Power salute at the 1968 Olympics in Mexico
City. Tommie Smith and John Carolos (right) won
gold and bronze medals in the 200 meters. The
silver medalist, Australian Peter Norman (left), is
wearing an Olympic Project for Human Rights
badge to show his support.

Sources: (1) “If the Negro Wins, Labor Wins,” by Martin Luther King delivered
February 12, 1962. Reprinted by arrangement with the Heirs to the Estate of Martin
Luther King Jr., c/o Writers House as agent for the proprietor, New York, NY.
Copyright © 1962 Martin Luther King Jr. Copyright renewed 1991 Coretta Scott
King; (3) Commentary, February 1965; (4) James Farmer, Freedom, When? (New
York: Random House, 1965), 25–27, 42–47; (5) Stokely Carmichael and Charles V.
Hamilton, Black Power: The Politics of Liberation (New York: Vintage, 1992,
orig. 1967), 37, 44.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Compare sources 1 and 3. What does Rustin mean when
he says that ending segregation in public accommoda-
tions has not affected the “fundamental conditions” of
African American life? How does King’s point in docu-
ment 1 address such issues?

2.  Examine the two photographs. What do they reveal
about different kinds of protest? About different
perspectives among African Americans?

3.  What does “self-determination” mean for Farmer and

Carmichael and Hamilton?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Compose an essay in which you use the documents above,
in addition to your reading of the chapter, to explore and
explain different approaches to African American rights in
the 1960s. In particular, think about how all of the docu-
ments come from a single movement, yet each expresses
a distinct viewpoint and a distinct way of conceiving what
“the struggle” is about. How do these approaches compare
to the tactics of earlier struggles for civil rights?

AP images.

889

