890

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
In what ways did white
resistance hinder the civil
rights movement? In what
ways did it help?

On  assuming  the  presidency,
Lyndon  Johnson  made  passing
the  civil  rights  bill  a  priority.  A
southerner  and  former  Senate
leader,  Johnson  was
majority
renowned for his fierce persuasive
style and tough political bargain-
ing. Using equal parts moral leverage, the memory of
the slain JFK, and his own brand of hardball politics,
Johnson overcame the filibuster. In June 1964, Congress
approved  the  most  far-reaching  civil  rights  law  since
Reconstruction. The keystone of the Civil Rights Act of
1964,  Title  VII,  outlawed  discrimination  in  employ-
ment on the basis of race, religion, national origin, and
sex. Another section guaranteed equal access to public
accommodations  and  schools.  The  law  granted  new
enforcement  powers  to  the  U.S.  attorney  general  and
established the Equal Employment Opportunity Com-
mission  to  implement  the  prohibition  against  job
discrimination.

Freedom  Summer  The  Civil  Rights  Act  was  a  law
with  real  teeth,  but  it  left  untouched  the  obstacles  to
black  voting  rights.  So  protesters  went  back  into  the
streets. In 1964, in what came to be known as Freedom
Summer,  black  organizations  mounted  a  major  cam-
paign in Mississippi. The effort drew several thousand
volunteers  from  across  the  country,  including  nearly
one thousand white college students from the North.
Led  by  the  charismatic  SNCC  activist  Robert  Moses,
the  four  major  civil  rights  organizations  (SNCC,
CORE, NAACP, and SCLC) spread out across the state.
They  established  freedom  schools  for  black  children
and conducted a major voter registration drive. Yet so
determined was the opposition that only about twelve
hundred black voters were registered that summer, at a
cost of four murdered civil rights workers and thirty-
seven black churches bombed or burned.

The  murders  strengthened  the  resolve  of  the
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP), which
had been founded during Freedom Summer. Banned

Women in the Movement

Though often overshadowed by men in the public spotlight, women were crucial to the black freedom
movement. Here, protesting at the 1964 Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City, are (left to
right) Fannie Lou Hamer, Eleanor Holmes, and Ella Baker. The men are (left to right) Emory Harris, Stokely
Carmichael, and Sam Block. Hamer had been a sharecropper before she became a leader under Baker’s
tutelage, and Holmes was a Yale University–trained lawyer who went on to become the ﬁrst female chair
of the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. © 1976 George Ballis/Take Stock/The Image Works.

