CHAPTER 27

  Walking into Freedom Land: The Civil Rights Movement, 1941–1973

891

from the “whites only” Mississippi Democratic Party,
MFDP  leaders  were  determined  to  attend  the  1964
Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City, New
Jersey,  as  the  legitimate  representatives  of  their  state.
Inspired by Fannie Lou Hamer, a former sharecropper
turned  civil  rights  activist,  the  MFDP  challenged  the
most powerful figures in the Democratic Party, includ-
ing Lyndon Johnson, the Democrats’ presidential nom-
inee.  “Is  this  America?”  Hamer  asked  party  officials
when she demanded that the MFDP, and not the all-
white Mississippi delegation, be recognized by the con-
vention. Democratic leaders, however, seated the white
Mississippi  delegation  and  refused  to  recognize  the
MFDP.  Demoralized  and  convinced
the
Democratic Party would not change, Moses told televi-
sion reporters: “I will have nothing to do with the polit-
ical system any longer.”

that

Selma  and  the Voting  Rights Act  Martin  Luther
King  Jr.  and  the  SCLC  did  not  share  Moses’s  skepti-
cism.  They  believed  that  another  confrontation  with
southern injustice could provoke further congressional
action. In March 1965, James Bevel of the SCLC called
for a march from Selma, Alabama, to the state capital,
Montgomery, to protest the murder of a voting-rights
activist.  As  soon  as  the  six  hundred  marchers  left
Selma,  crossing  over  the  Edmund  Pettus  Bridge,
mounted  state  troopers  attacked  them  with  tear  gas
and clubs. The scene was shown on national television
that  night,  and  the  day  became  known  as  Bloody
Sunday.  Calling  the  episode  “an  American  tragedy,”
President Johnson went back to Congress.

The Voting Rights Act of 1965, which was signed by
President Johnson on August 6, outlawed the literacy

tests and other devices that prevented African Amer-
icans from registering to vote, and authorized the attor-
ney general to send federal examiners to register voters
in any county where registration was less than 50 per-
cent.  Together  with  the  Twenty-fourth  Amendment
(1964),  which  outlawed  the  poll  tax  in  federal  elec-
tions, the Voting Rights Act enabled millions of Afri-
can  Americans  to  vote  for  the  first  time  since  the
Reconstruction era.

In  the  South,  the  results  were  stunning.  In  1960,
only  20  percent  of  black  citizens  had  been  registered
to  vote;  by  1971,  registration  reached  62  percent
(Map  27.4).  Moreover,  across  the  nation  the  number
of  black  elected  officials  began  to  climb,  quadrupling
from  1,400  to  4,900  between  1970  and  1980  and
doubling  again  by  the  early  1990s.  Most  of  those
elected  held  local  offices — from  sheriff  to  county
commissioner — but  nonetheless  embodied  a  shift  in
political representation nearly unimaginable a genera-
tion earlier. As Hartman Turnbow, a Mississippi farmer
who risked his life to register in 1964, later declared, “It
won’t never go back where it was.”

Something else would never go back either: the lib-
eral  New  Deal  coalition.  By  the  second  half  of  the
1960s,  the  liberal  wing  of  the  Democratic  Party  had
won  its  battle  with  the  conservative,  segregationist
wing. Democrats had embraced the civil rights move-
ment and made African American equality a corner-
stone  of  a  new  “rights”  liberalism.  But  over  the  next
generation, between the 1960s and the 1980s, southern
whites and many conservative northern whites would
respond  by  switching  to  the  Republican  Party.  Strom
Thurmond,  the  segregationist  senator  from  South
Carolina, symbolically led the revolt by renouncing the

MAP 27.4
Black Voter Registration in the South,
1964 and 1975

After passage of the Voting Rights
Act of 1965, black registration in
the South increased dramatically.
The bars on the map show the
number of African Amer i cans
registered in 1964, before the
act was passed, and in 1975,
after it had been in effect for
ten years. States in the Deep
South, such as Mississippi, Ala-
bama, and Georgia, had the
biggest increases.

VA.

N.C.

N

W

E

S

S.C.

FLA.

TENN.

MISS.

ALA.

GA.

ARK.

LA.

Number of Black
Registered Voters

1964

1975

Total for South:

2,164,000
(1964)

3,835,000
(1975)

TEXAS

0

0

200

400 miles

200

400 kilometers

