892

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Democrats  and  becoming  a  Republican  in  1964.  The
New Deal coalition — which had joined working-class
whites,  northern  African  Americans,  urban  profes-
sionals, and white southern segregationists together in
a fragile political alliance since the 1930s — was begin-
ning to crumble.

Beyond Civil Rights,
1966–1973
Activists  had  long  known  that  Supreme  Court  deci-
sions  and  new  laws  do  not  automatically  produce
changes  in  society.  But  in  the  mid-1960s,  civil  rights
advocates confronted a more profound issue: perhaps
even protests were not enough. In 1965, Bayard Rustin
wrote of the need to move “from protest to politics” in
order  to  build  institutional  black  power.  Some  black
leaders,  such  as  the  young  SNCC  activists  Stokely
Carmichael, Frances Beal, and John Lewis, grew frus-
trated with the slow pace of reform and the stubborn
resistance of whites. Still others believed that address-
ing black poverty and economic disadvantage remained
the  most  important  objective.  Neither  new  laws  nor
long marches appeared capable of meeting these varied
and complex challenges.

The  conviction  that  civil  rights  alone  were  inca-
pable of guaranteeing equality took hold in many minor-
ity  communities  in  this  period.  African  Americans
were  joined  by  Mexican  Americans,  Puerto  Ricans,
and  American  Indians.  They  came  at  the  problem  of
inequality from different perspectives, but each group
asked  a  similar  question:  As  crucial  as  legal  equality
was,  how  much  did  it  matter  if  most  people  of  color
remained  in  or  close  to  poverty,  if  white  society  still
regarded nonwhites as inferior, and if the major social
and  political  institutions  in  the  country  were  run  by
whites? Black leaders and representatives of other non-
white communities increasingly asked themselves this
question  as  they  searched  for  ways  to  build  on  the
achievements of the civil rights decade of 1954–1965.

Black Nationalism
Seeking answers to these questions led many African
Americans to embrace black nationalism. The philoso-
phy of black nationalism signified many things in the
1960s. It could mean anything from pride in one’s com-
munity  to  total  separatism,  from  building  African
American–owned  businesses  to  wearing  dashikis  in
honor  of  African  traditions.  Historically,  nationalism

had  emphasized  the  differences  between  blacks  and
whites  as  well  as  black  people’s  power  (and  right)  to
shape their own destiny. In the late nineteenth century,
nationalists  founded  the  Back  to  Africa  movement,
and  in  the  1920s  the  nationalist  Marcus  Garvey
inspired African Americans to take pride in their racial
heritage (Chapter 22).

In  the  early  1960s,  the  leading  exponent  of  black
nationalism  was  the  Nation  of  Islam,  which  fused  a
rejection  of  Christianity  with  a  strong  philosophy  of
self-improvement. Black Muslims, as they were known,
adhered  to  a  strict  code  of  personal  behavior;  men
were recognizable by their dark suits, white shirts, and
ties, women by their long dresses and head coverings.
Black Muslims preached an apocalyptic brand of Islam,
anticipating  the  day  when  Allah  would  banish  the
white  “devils”  and  give  the  black  nation  justice.
Although  its  full  converts  numbered  only  about  ten
thousand, the Nation of Islam had a wide popular fol-
lowing among African Americans in northern cities.

Malcolm X  The most charismatic Black Muslim was
Malcolm X (the X stood for his African family name,
lost under slavery). A spellbinding speaker, Malcolm X
preached a philosophy of militant separatism, although
he advocated violence only for self-defense. Hostile to
mainstream  civil  rights  organizations,  he  caustically
referred  to  the  1963  March  on  Washington  as  the
“Farce  on  Washington.”  Malcolm  X  said  plainly,  “I
believe in the brotherhood of man, all men, but I don’t
believe in brotherhood with anybody who doesn’t want
brotherhood with me.” Malcolm X had little interest in
changing  the  minds  of  hostile  whites.  Strengthening
the black community, he believed, represented a surer
path to freedom and equality.

In 1964, after a power struggle with founder Elijah
Muhammad,  Malcolm  X  broke  with  the  Nation  of
Islam. While he remained a black nationalist, he mod-
erated his antiwhite views and began to talk of a class
struggle uniting poor whites and blacks. Following an
inspiring trip to the Middle East, where he saw Muslims
of all races worshipping together, Malcolm X formed
the Organization of Afro-American Unity to promote
black  pride  and  to  work  with  traditional  civil  rights
groups. But he got no further. On February 21, 1965,
Malcolm X was assassinated while delivering a speech
in Harlem. Three Black Muslims were later convicted
of his murder.

Black Power  A more secular brand of black nation-
alism emerged in 1966 when SNCC and CORE activ-
ists, following the lead of Stokely Carmichael, began to

