CHAPTER 27

  Walking into Freedom Land: The Civil Rights Movement, 1941–1973

893

Malcolm X

Until his murder in 1965, Malcolm X was
the leading proponent of black nationalism
in the United States. A brilliant and dynamic
orator, Malcolm had been a minister in the
Nation of Islam for nearly thirteen years,
until he broke with the Nation in 1964. His
emphasis on black pride and self-help and
his unrelenting criticism of white supremacy
made him one of the freedom movement’s
most inspirational ﬁgures, both in life and
well after his death. ©Topham/The Image
Works.

call  for  black  self-reliance  under  the  banner  of  Black
Power.  Advocates  of  Black  Power  asked  fundamental
questions:  If  alliances  with  whites  were  necessary  to
achieve racial justice, as King believed they were, did
that make African Americans dependent on the good
intentions  of  whites?  If  so,  could  black  people  trust
those  good  intentions  in  the  long  run?  Increasingly,
those  inclined  toward  Black  Power  believed  that
African Americans should build economic and politi-
cal  power  in  their  own  communities.  Such  power
would translate into a less dependent relationship with
white  America.  “For  once,”  Carmichael  wrote,  “black
people are going to use the words they want to use — not
the words whites want to hear.”

Spurred  by  the  Black  Power  slogan,  African
American  activists  turned  their  attention  to  the  pov-
erty and social injustice faced by so many black people.
President  Johnson  had  declared  the  War  on  Poverty,
and black organizers joined, setting up day care cen-
ters,  running  community  job  training  programs,  and
working to improve housing and health care in urban
neighborhoods.  In  major  cities  such  as  Philadelphia,
New York, Chicago, and Pitts burgh, activists sought to

open jobs in police and fire departments and in con-
struction  and  transportation  to  black  workers,  who
had  been  excluded  from  these
occupations  for  decades.  Others
worked  to  end  police  harass-
ment — a major problem in urban
black communities — and to help
black  entrepreneurs  to  receive
small-business loans. CORE leader
Floyd McKissick explained, “Black
Power  is  not  Black  Supremacy;  it  is  a  united  Black
Voice reflecting racial pride.”

UNDERSTAND POINTS
OF VIEW
Why were Black Power
and black nationalism
compelling to many
African Americans?

The  attention  to  racial  pride  led  some  African
Americans to reject white society and to pursue more
authentic  cultural  forms.  In  addition  to  focusing  on
economic disadvantage, Black Power emphasized black
pride  and  self-determination.  Those  subscribing  to
these  beliefs  wore  African  clothing,  chose  natural
hairstyles,  and  celebrated  black  history,  art,  and  lit-
erature. The Black Arts movement thrived, and musi-
cal tastes shifted from the crossover sounds of Motown
to  the  soul  music  of  Philadelphia,  Memphis,  and
Chicago.

