894

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Black Panther Party  One of the most radical nation-
alist  groups  was  the  Black  Panther  Party,  founded  in
Oakland, California, in 1966 by two college students,
Huey  Newton  and  Bobby  Seale.  A  militant  organiza-
tion dedicated to protecting African Americans from
police violence, the Panthers took their cue from the
slain  Malcolm  X.  They  vehemently  opposed  the
Vietnam  War  and  declared  their  affinity  for  Third
World  revolutionary  movements  and  armed  struggle
(Map 27.5). In their manifesto, “What We Want, What
We  Believe,”  the  Panthers  outlined  their  Ten  Point
Program for black liberation.

The Panthers’ organization spread to other cities in
the late 1960s, where members undertook a wide range
of community-organizing projects. Their free breakfast
program  for  children  and  their  testing  program  for
sickle-cell  anemia,  an  inherited  disease  with  a  high
incidence  among  African  Americans,  were  especially
popular. However, the Panthers’ radicalism and belief
in armed self-defense resulted in violent clashes with
police. Newton was charged with murdering a  police

officer, several Panthers were killed by police, and doz-
ens went to prison. Moreover, under its domestic coun-
terintelligence program, the Federal Bureau of Invest-
igation (FBI) had begun disrupting party activities.

Young  Lords  Among  those  inspired  by  the  Black
Panthers  were  Puerto  Ricans  in  New  York.  Their  ve-
hicle was the  Young  Lords  Organization (YLO), later
renamed  the  Young  Lords  Party.  Like  the  Black
Panthers, YLO activists sought self-determination for
Puerto  Ricans,  both  those  in  the  United  States  and
those on the island in the Caribbean. In practical terms,
the YLO focused on improving neighborhood condi-
tions: city garbage collection was notoriously poor in
East  Harlem,  where  most  Puerto  Ricans  lived,  and
slumlords had allowed the housing to become squalid.
Women in the YLO were especially active, protesting
sterilization  campaigns  against  Puerto  Rican  women
and fighting to improve access to health care. As  was
true of so many nationalist groups, immediate victories
for the YLO were few, but their dedicated community

The Black Panther Party

One of the most radical organizations of the 1960s, the Black Panther Party was founded in 1966 by Bobby
Seale and Huey Newton (shown together in the photograph on the left) in Oakland, California. Its members
carried weapons, advocated socialism, and fought police brutality in black communities, but they also ran
into their own trouble with the law. Nevertheless, the party had great success in reaching ordinary people,
often with programs targeted at the poor. On the right, party members distribute free hot dogs to the public
in New Haven, Connecticut, in 1969. LEFT: Bruno Barbey/Magnum Photos. RIGHT: Photo by David Fenton/Getty Images.

