896

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

These politicians had translated black power not into a
wholesale rejection of white society but into a revital-
ized liberalism that would remain an indelible feature
of urban politics for the rest of the century.

Poverty and Urban Violence
Black Power was not, fundamentally, a violent political
ideology.  But  violence  did  play  a  decisive  role  in  the
politics of black liberation in the mid-1960s. Too many
Americans,  white  and  black,  had  little  knowledge  or
understanding  of  the  rage  that  existed  just  below  the
surface in many poor northern black neighborhoods.
That rage boiled over in a wave of riots that struck the
nation’s cities in mid-decade. The first “long hot sum-
mer” began in July 1964 in New York City when police
shot a black criminal suspect in Harlem. Angry youths
looted and rioted there for a week. Over the next four
years, the volatile issue of police brutality set off riots in
dozens of cities.

In August 1965, the arrest of a young black motor-
ist in the Watts section of Los Angeles sparked six days
of rioting that left thirty-four people dead. “There is a
different type of Negro emerging,” one riot participant
told investigators. “They are not going to wait for the
evolutionary process for their rights to be a man.” The
riots of 1967, however, were the most serious, engulf-
ing twenty-two cities in July and August. Forty-three
people were killed in Detroit alone, nearly all of them
black, and $50 million worth of property was destroyed.
President  Johnson  called  in  the  National  Guard  and
U.S. Army troops, many of them having just returned
from Vietnam, to restore order.

Johnson, who believed that the Civil Rights Act and
the Voting Rights Act had immeasurably helped Afri-
can Americans, was stunned by the rioting. Despondent
at the news from Watts, “he refused to look at the cables
from Los Angeles,” recalled one aide. Virtually all black
leaders condemned the rioting, though they understood
its origins in poverty and deprivation. At a meeting in
Watts,  Martin  Luther  King  Jr.  admitted  that  he  had
“failed to take the civil rights movement to the masses
of the people,” such as those in the Los Angeles ghetto.
His  appearance  appeased  few.  “We  don’t  need  your
dreams; we need jobs!” one heckler shouted at King.

Following  the  gut-wrenching  riots  in  Detroit  and
Newark  in  1967,  Johnson  appointed  a  presidential
commission, headed by Illinois governor Otto Kerner,
to  investigate  the  causes  of  the  violence.  Released  in
1968,  the  Kerner  Commission  Report  was  a  searing
look at race in America, the most honest and forthright
government document about race since the Presidential
Committee  on  Civil  Rights’  1947  report  “To  Secure

These Rights.” “Our nation is moving toward two soci-
eties,” the Kerner Commission Report concluded, “one
black,  one  white — separate  and  unequal.” The  report
did  not  excuse  the  brick-throwing,  firebombing,  and
looting of the previous summers, but it placed the riots
in  sociological  context.  Shut  out  of  white-dominated
society, impoverished African Americans felt they had
no stake in the social order.

Stirred by turmoil in the cities, and seeing the limi-
tations of his civil rights achievements, Martin Luther
King Jr. began to expand his vision beyond civil rights
to confront the deep-seated problems of poverty and
racism in America as a whole. He criticized President
Johnson  and  Congress  for  prioritizing  the  war  in
Vietnam over the fight against poverty at home, and he
planned a massive movement called the Poor People’s
Campaign to fight economic injustice. To advance that
cause,  he  went  to  Memphis,  Tennessee,  to  support  a
strike  by  predominantly  black  sanitation  workers.
There, on April 4, 1968, he was assassinated by escaped
white convict James Earl Ray. King’s death set off a fur-
ther round of urban rioting, with major violence break-
ing out in more than a hundred cities.

Tragically, King was murdered before achieving the
transformations  he  sought:  an  end  to  racial  injustice
and  a  solution  to  poverty.  The  civil rights  movement
had  helped  set  in  motion  permanent,  indeed  revolu-
tionary, changes in American race relations. Jim Crow
segregation  ended,  federal  legislation  ensured  black
Americans’  most  basic  civil  rights,  and  the  white
monopoly on political power in the South was broken.
However, by 1968, the fight over civil rights had also
divided the nation. The Democratic Party was splitting,
and  a  new  conservatism  was  gaining  strength.  Many
whites felt that the issue of civil rights was receiving too
much attention, to the detriment of other national con-
cerns. The riots of 1965, 1967, and 1968 further alien-
ated  many  whites,  who  blamed  the  violence  on  the
inability  of  Democratic  officials  to  maintain  law  and
order.

Rise of the Chicano Movement
Mexican Americans had something of a counterpart to
Martin  Luther  King:  Cesar  Chavez.  In  Chavez’s  case,
however,  economic  struggle  in  community  organiza-
tions and the labor movement had shaped his approach
to mobilizing society’s disadvantaged. He and Dolores
Huerta  had  worked  for  the  Community  Service
Organization (CSO), a California group founded in the
1950s to promote Mexican political participation and
civil rights. Leaving that organization in 1962, Chavez
concentrated on the agricultural region around Delano,

