CHAPTER 27

  Walking into Freedom Land: The Civil Rights Movement, 1941–1973

897

California. With Huerta, he organized the United Farm
Workers (UFW), a union for migrant workers.

Huerta  was  a  brilliant  organizer,  but  the  deeply
spiritual and ascetic Chavez embodied the moral force
behind  what  was  popularly  called  La  Causa.  A  1965
grape pickers’ strike led the UFW to call a nationwide
boycott of table grapes, bringing Chavez huge publicity
and backing from the AFL-CIO. In a bid for attention
to the struggle, Chavez staged a hunger strike in 1968,
which ended dramatically after twenty-eight days with
Senator Robert F. Kennedy at his side to break the fast.
Victory came in 1970 when California grape growers
signed contracts recognizing the UFW.

Mexican Americans shared some civil rights con-
cerns  with  African  Americans — especially  access  to
jobs — but they also had unique concerns: the status of
the  Spanish  language  in  schools,  for  instance,  and
immigration  policy.  Mexican  Americans  had  been
politically active since the 1940s, aiming to surmount
factors  that  obstructed  their  political  involvement:
poverty,  language  barriers,  and  discrimination.  Their
efforts began to pay off in the 1960s, when the Mexican
American  Political  Association  (MAPA)  mobilized
support for John F. Kennedy and worked successfully
with  other  organizations  to  elect  Mexican  American
candidates  such  as  Edward  Roybal  of  California  and
Henry González of Texas to Congress. Two other orga-
nizations, the Mexican American Legal Defense Fund
(MALDF)  and  the  Southwest  Voter  Registration  and
Education Project, carried the fight against discrimina-
tion  to  Washington,  D.C.,  and  mobilized  Mexican
Americans into an increasingly powerful voting bloc.

Younger Mexican Americans grew impatient with
civil rights groups such as MAPA and MALDF, how-
ever.  The  barrios  of  Los  Angeles  and  other  western
cities produced the militant Brown Berets, modeled on
the Black Panthers (who wore black berets). Rejecting
their elders’ assimilationist approach (that is, a belief in
adapting to Anglo society), fifteen
hundred  Mexican  American  stu-
dents  met  in  Denver  in  1969  to
hammer  out  a  new  political  and
cultural agenda. They proclaimed
a new term, Chicano (and its fem-
inine  form,  Chicana),  to  replace
Mexi can  American,  and
later
organized  a  political  party,  La
Raza  Unida  (The  United  Race),  to  promote  Chicano
interests.  Young  Chicana  feminists  formed  a  number
of organizations, including Las Hijas (The Daughters),
which organized women both on college campuses and
in  the  barrios.  In  Cali fornia  and  many  southwestern
states,  students  staged  demonstrations  to  press  for
bilingual education, the hiring of more Chicano teach-
ers, and the creation of Chicano studies programs. By
the  1970s,  dozens  of  such  programs  were  offered  at
universities throughout the region.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
What did the Chicano and
American Indian move-
ments have in common
with the black freedom
movement?

The American Indian Movement
American  Indians,  inspired  by  the  Black  Power  and
Chicano movements, organized to address their unique
circumstances. Numbering nearly 800,000 in the 1960s,
native  people  were  exceedingly  diverse — divided  by

Cesar Chavez

Inﬂuenced equally by the
Catholic Church and Mahatma
Gandhi, Cesar Chavez was one
of the leading Mexican Ameri-
can civil rights and social
justice activists of the 1960s.
With Dolores Huerta, he
cofounded the United Farm
Workers (UFW), a union of
primarily Mexican American
agricultural laborers in
California. Here he speaks
at a rally in support of the
grape boycott, an attempt by
the UFW to force the nation’s
grape growers — and, by exten-
sion, the larger agriculture
industry — to improve wages
and working conditions and to
bargain in good faith with the
union. © Jason Laure/The Image
Works.

