898

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

language, tribal history, region, and degree of integra-
tion into Ameri can life. As a group, they shared a stag-
gering  unemployment  rate — ten  times  the  national
average — and  were  the  worst  off  in  housing,  disease
rates, and access to education. Native people also had
an often troubling relationship with the federal govern-
ment. In the 1960s, the prevailing spirit of protest swept
through  Indian  communities.  Young  militants  chal-
lenged their elders in the National Con gress of Amer-
ican Indians. Beginning in 1960, the National Indian
Youth Council (NIYC), under the slogan “For a Greater
Indian America,” promoted the ideal of Native Ameri-
cans as a single ethnic group. The effort to both unite
Indians and celebrate individual tribal culture proved a
difficult balancing act.

The  NIYC  had  substantial  influence  within  tribal
communities, but two other organizations, the militant
Indians  of  All  Tribes  (IAT)  and  the  American  Indian
Movement (AIM), attracted more attention in the larger
society.  These  groups  embraced  the  concept  of  Red
Power, and beginning in 1968 they staged escalating
protests to draw attention to Indian concerns, especially
the concerns of urban Indians, many of whom had been
encouraged, or forced, to leave reservations by the fed-
eral government in earlier decades. In 1969, members of
the  IAT  occupied  the  deserted  federal  penitentiary  on

Alcatraz  Island  in  San  Francisco  Bay  and  proclaimed:
“We will purchase said Alcatraz Island for twenty-four
dollars in glass beads and red cloth, a precedent set by
the white man’s purchase of a similar island [Manhattan]
about 300 years ago.” In 1972, AIM members joined the
Trail of Broken Treaties, a march sponsored by a number
of Indian groups. When AIM activists seized the head-
quarters  of  the  hated  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs  in
Washington,  D.C.,  and  ransacked  the  building,  older
tribal leaders denounced them.

To see a longer excerpt of the “Proclamation To the
Great White Father and All His People,” along with
other primary sources from this period, see Sources
for America’s History.

However,  AIM  managed  to  focus  national  media
attention  on  Native  American  issues  with  a  siege  at
Wounded Knee, South Dakota, in February 1973. The
site  of  the  infamous  1890  massacre  of  the  Sioux,
Wounded Knee was situated on the Pine Ridge Reser-
vation, where young AIM activists had cultivated ties
to sympathetic elders. For more than two months, AIM
members occupied a small collection of buildings, sur-
rounded by a cordon of FBI agents and U.S. marshals.
Several  gun  battles  left  two  dead,  and  the  siege  was
finally brought to a negotiated end. Although upsetting

Native American Activism

In November 1969, a group of Native Americans, united under the name Indians of All Tribes, occupied
Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay. They claimed the land under a nineteenth-century treaty, but their
larger objective was to force the federal government — which owned the island — to address the long-
standing grievances of native peoples, including widespread poverty on reservations. Shown here is the
view along the gunwale of the boat carrying Tim Williams, a chief of the Klamath River Hurek tribe in
full ceremonial regalia, to the island. Ralph Crane/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images.

