CHAPTER 27

  CHAPTER REVIEW

899

to many white onlookers and Indian elders alike, AIM
protests attracted widespread mainstream media cov-
erage and spurred government action on tribal issues.

SUMMARY
African Americans and others who fought for civil rights
from World War II through the early 1970s sought equal
rights  and  economic  opportunity.  That  quest  was  also
inspired by various forms of nationalism that called for
self-determination for minority groups. For most of the
first  half  of  the  twentieth  century,  African  Americans
faced a harsh Jim Crow system in the South and a segre-
gated, though more open, society in the North. Segrega-
tion was maintained by a widespread belief in black infe-
riority  and  by  a  southern  political  system  that  denied
African Americans the vote. In the Southwest and West,
Mexican Americans, Native Americans, and Americans
of  Asian  descent  faced  discriminatory  laws  and  social
practices that marginalized them.

The civil rights movement attacked racial inequal-
ity in three ways. First, the movement sought equality

under the law for all Americans, regardless of race. This
required patient work through the judicial system and
the more arduous task of winning congressional legis-
lation,  such  as  the  Civil  Rights  Act  of  1964  and  the
Voting Rights Act of 1965. Second, grassroots activists,
using nonviolent protest, pushed all levels of govern-
ment (from city to federal) to abide by Supreme Court
decisions  (such  as  Brown  v.  Board  of  Education)  and
civil rights laws. Third, the movement worked to open
economic opportunity for minority populations. This
was embodied in the 1963 March on Washington for
Jobs and Freedom. Ultimately, the civil rights movement
successfully  established  the  principle  of  legal  equality,
but it faced more difficult problems in fighting poverty
and creating widespread economic opportunity.

The limitations of the civil rights model led black
activists — along  with  Mexican  Americans,  Native
Amer icans,  and  others — to  adopt  a  more  nationalist
stance after 1966. Nationalism stressed the creation of
political and economic power in communities of color,
the celebration of racial heritage, and the rejection of
white cultural standards.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

rights liberalism (p. 868)
Congress of Racial Equality

(CORE) (p. 870)
Jim Crow (p. 870)
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car

Porters (p. 873)

“To Secure These Rights” (p. 875)
States’ Rights Democratic Party

(p. 875)

American GI Forum (p. 877)
Brown v. Board of Education of

Topeka (p. 878)

Montgomery Bus Boycott (p. 881)
Southern Christian Leadership
Conference (SCLC) (p. 882)

Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee (SNCC) (p. 882)
March on Washington (p. 886)
Civil Rights Act of 1964 (p. 890)
Mississippi Freedom Democratic

Party (p. 890)

Voting Rights Act of 1965 (p. 891)
black nationalism (p. 892)
Nation of Islam (p. 892)
Black Panther Party (p. 894)
Young Lords Organization (p. 894)
United Farm Workers (UFW)

(p. 897)

American Indian Movement

(AIM) (p. 898)

Key People

A. Philip Randolph (p. 873)
James Farmer (p. 873)
Cesar Chavez (p. 877)
Dolores Huerta (p. 877)
Thurgood Marshall (p. 877)
Rosa Parks (p. 881)
Martin Luther King Jr. (p. 881)
Malcolm X (p. 892)
Stokely Carmichael (p. 892)

