900

PART 8

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  Why did the civil rights movement begin when it

did?

2.  How  would  you  explain  the  rise  of  the  protest
movement after 1955? How did nonviolent tactics
help the movement?

3.  How did the civil rights movement create a crisis in

liberalism and in the Democratic Party?

4.  How  did  the  civil  rights  movement  and  other
activist groups cause changes to government and
society?

5.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  One  of  the
most  significant  themes  of  the  period  from  1945
to the 1980s is the growth of the power of the fed-
eral  government.  (See  “Politics  and  Power”  and
“Identity” on the thematic timeline on p. 803.) In
what ways is the civil rights movement also part of
that story?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  Why  is  the
decade of the 1960s often referred to as the “second
Reconstruction”? Think broadly about the century
between the end of the Civil War in 1865 and the
passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. What are
the key turning points in African American history
in that long period?

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  Examine  the  photograph
of a confrontation at North Little Rock High School
on  page  881.  How  does  this  photograph  reveal
the  role  that  the  media  played  in  the  civil  rights
struggle?  Can  you  find  similar  evidence  in  other
photographs from this chapter?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Peniel Joseph, Waiting ’til the Midnight Hour: A
Narrative History of Black Power in America (2006).
An important history of Black Power.

Barbara Ransby, Ella Baker and the Black Freedom
Movement (2003). A powerful biography of a key
activist.

Ian F. Haney López, Racism on Trial: The Chicano
Fight for Justice (2003). An exceptional case study
of the Chicano movement in Los Angeles.

Charles Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom: The
Organizing Tradition and the Mississippi Freedom
Struggle (1995). A detailed case study that provides
a local view of movement activism.

Thomas J. Sugrue, Sweet Land of Liberty: The Forgot-
ten Struggle for Civil Rights in the North (2008). A
significant, readable overview of the civil rights
movement.

The Civil Rights in Mississippi Digital Archive, at
digilib.usm.edu/crmda.php, offers 150 oral histories
relating to Mississippi.

