28

C H A P T E R

LIBERALISM AT
HIGH TIDE

John F. Kennedy’s Promise

Lyndon B. Johnson and the

Great Society

Rebirth of the Women’s

Movement

THE VIETNAM WAR
BEGINS

Escalation Under Johnson

Public Opinion and the War

Rise of the Student Movement

DAYS OF RAGE,
1968–1972

War Abroad, Tragedy at Home

The Antiwar Movement and the

1968 Election

The Nationalist Turn

Women’s Liberation

Stonewall and Gay Liberation

RICHARD NIXON AND
THE POLITICS OF THE
SILENT MAJORITY
Nixon in Vietnam

The Silent Majority Speaks Out

The 1972 Election

902

Uncivil Wars: Liberal Crisis and
Conservative Rebirth
1961–1972

The  civil  rights  movement  stirred

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
What  were  liberalism’s  social  and
political achievements in the 1960s,
and  how  did  debates  over  liberal
values contribute to conflict at home
and reflect tension abroad?

Amer ican liberals and pushed them
to  initiate  bold  new  government
policies  to  advance  racial  equality.  That
progressive spirit inspired an even broader
reform  agenda  that  came  to  include
women’s  rights,  new  social  programs  for
the  poor  and  the  aged,  job  training,  environmental  laws,  and  other  educational  and
social  beneﬁts  for  the  middle  class.  All  told,  Congress  passed  more  liberal  legislation
between 1964 and 1972 than in any period since the 1930s. The great bulk of it came
during the 1965–1966 legislative session, one of the most active in American history.
Liberalism was at high tide.

It did not stay there long. Liberals quickly came under assault from two directions.
First, young activists became frustrated with slow progress on civil rights and rebelled
against  the  Vietnam  War.  At  the  1968  Democratic  National  Convention  in  Chicago,
police teargassed and clubbed antiwar demonstrators, who chanted (as the TV cameras
rolled),  “The  whole  world  is  watching!”  Some  of  them  had  been  among  the  young
idealists inspired by Kennedy’s inaugural address and the civil rights movement. Now
they rejected everything that Cold War liberalism stood for. Inside the convention hall,
the proceedings were chaotic, the atmosphere poisonous, the delegates bitterly divided
over Vietnam.

A second assault on liberalism came from conservatives, who found their footing
after being marginalized during the 1950s. Conservatives opposed the dramatic expan-
sion of the federal government under President Lyndon B. Johnson and disdained the
“permissive society” they believed liberalism had unleashed. Advocating law and order,
belittling  welfare,  and  resisting  key  civil  rights  reforms,  conservatives  leaped  back  to
political life in the late sixties. Their champion was Barry Goldwater, a Republican sena-
tor from Arizona, who warned that “a government big enough to give you everything
you want is also big enough to take away everything you have.”

The clashing of left, right, and center made the decade between the inauguration
of President John F. Kennedy in 1961 and the 1972 landslide reelection of Richard Nixon
one of the most contentious, complicated, and explosive eras in American history. There
were thousands of marches and demonstrations; massive new federal programs aimed
at achieving civil rights, ending poverty, and extending the welfare state; and new voices
among women, African Americans, and Latinos demanding to be heard. With heated,
vitriolic rhetoric on all sides, these developments overlapped with political assassinations
and violence both overseas and at home. In this chapter, we undertake to explain how
the rekindling of liberal reform under the twin auspices of the civil rights movement and
the leadership of President Johnson gave way to a profound liberal crisis and the resur-
gence of conservatism.

