904

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Liberalism at High Tide
In May 1964, Lyndon Johnson, president for barely six
months,  delivered  the  commencement  address  at  the
University of Michigan. Johnson offered his audience a
grand and inspirational vision of a new liberal age. “We
have the opportunity to move not only toward the rich
society and the powerful society,” Johnson continued,
“but  upward  to  the  Great  Society.”  As  the  sun-baked
graduates listened, Johnson spelled out what he meant:
“The Great Society rests on abundance and liberty for
all. It demands an end to poverty and racial injustice.”
Even this, Johnson declared, was just the beginning. He
would push to renew American education, rebuild the
cities, and restore the natural environment. Ambitious —
even audacious — Johnson’s vision was a New Deal for
a new era. From that day forward, the president would
harness  his  considerable  political  skills  to  make  that
vision  a  reality.  A  tragic  irony,  however,  was  that  he
held the presidency at all.

To see a longer excerpt of Johnson’s commence ment
address, along with other primary sources from this
period, see Sources for America’s History.

John F. Kennedy’s Promise
In  1961,  three  years  before  Johnson’s  Great  Society
speech, John F. Kennedy declared at his inauguration:
“Let  the  word  go  forth  from  this  time  and  place,  to
friend and foe alike, that the torch has been passed to a
new generation of Americans.” He challenged his fel-
low citizens to “ask what you can do for your country,”
a  call  to  service  that  inspired  many  Americans.  The
British journalist Henry Fairley called Kennedy’s activ-
ism “the politics of expectation.” Over time, the expec-
tations Kennedy embodied, combined with his ability
to inspire a younger generation, laid the groundwork
for an era of liberal reform.

Kennedy’s legislative record did not live up to his
promising image. This was not entirely his fault; con-
gressional  partisanship  and  resistance  stymied  many
presidents in the twentieth century. Kennedy’s domes-
tic advisors devised bold plans for health insurance for
the  aged,  a  new  antipoverty  program,  and  a  tax  cut.
After enormous pressure from Martin Luther King Jr.
and  other  civil  rights  leaders — and  pushed  by  the
demonstrations  in Birmingham,  Alabama,  in  1963 —
they added a civil rights bill. None of these initiatives
went anywhere in the Senate, where powerful conser-
vative  interests  practiced  an  old  legislative  art:  delay,

delay, delay. All Kennedy’s bills were at a virtual stand-
still when tragedy struck.

On  November  22,  1963,  Kennedy  was  in  Dallas,
Texas, on a political trip. As he and his wife, Jacqueline,
rode  in  an  open  car  past  the  Texas  School  Book
Depository, he was shot through the head and neck by
a sniper. He died within the hour. (The accused killer,
twenty-four-year-old Lee Harvey Oswald, was himself
killed while in custody a few days later by an assassin, a
Dallas nightclub owner named Jack Ruby.) Before Air
Force One left Dallas to take the president’s body back
to  Washington,  a  grim-faced  Lyndon  Johnson  was
sworn in as Kennedy’s successor.

Kennedy’s youthful image, the trauma of his assas-
sination, and the nation’s sense of loss contributed to a
powerful  Kennedy  mystique.  His  canonization  after
death capped what had been an extraordinarily stage-
managed  presidency.  An  admiring  country  saw  in
Jack and Jackie Kennedy an ideal American marriage
(though JFK was, in fact, an obsessive womanizer); in
Kennedy the epitome of robust good health (though he
was actually afflicted by Addison’s disease); and in the
Kennedy White House a glamorous world of high fash-
ion  and  celebrity.  No  other  presidency  ever  matched
the  Kennedy  aura,  but  every  president  after  him
embraced  the  idea  that  image  mattered  as  much  as
reality in conducting a politically effective presidency.

Lyndon B. Johnson and the
Great Society
In  many  ways,  Lyndon  Johnson  was  the  opposite  of
Kennedy.  A  seasoned  Texas  politician  and  longtime
Senate leader, Johnson was most at home in the back
rooms of power. He was a rough-edged character who
had scrambled his way up, with few scruples, to wealth
and political eminence. But he never forgot his modest,
hill-country origins or lost his sympathy for the down-
trodden. Johnson lacked Kennedy’s style, but he rose to
the  political  challenge  after  Kennedy’s  assassination,
applying his astonishing energy and negotiating skills
to  revive  several  of  Kennedy’s  stalled  programs,  and
many more of his own, in the ambitious Great Society.
On  assuming  the  presidency,  Johnson  promptly
pushed for civil rights legislation as a memorial to his
slain predecessor (Chapter 27). His motives were com-
plex. As a southerner who had previously opposed civil
rights for African Americans, Johnson wished to prove
that he was more than a regional figure — he would be
the president of all the people. He also wanted to make
a mark on history, telling Martin Luther King Jr. and
other  civil  rights  leaders  to  lace  up  their  sneakers

