CHAPTER 28

  Uncivil Wars: Liberal Crisis and Conservative Rebirth, 1961–1972

905

The Great Society

President Lyndon Johnson toured
poverty-stricken regions of the
country in 1964. Here he visits
with Tom Fletcher, a father of
eight children in Martin County,
Kentucky. Johnson envisioned a
dramatic expansion of liberal
social programs, both to assist
the needy and to strengthen the
middle class, that he called the
Great Society. © Bettmann/Corbis.

because  he  would  move  so  fast  on  civil  rights  they
would  be  running  to  catch  up.  Politically,  the  choice
was risky. Johnson would please the Democratic Party’s
liberal  wing,  but  because  most  northern  African
Americans already voted Democratic, the party would
gain  few  additional  votes.  Moreover,  southern  white
Democrats would likely revolt, dividing the party at a
time when Johnson’s legislative agenda most required
unanimity.  But  Johnson  pushed  ahead,  and  the  1964
Civil Rights Act stands, in part, as a testament to the
president’s political risk-taking.

More than civil rights, what drove Johnson hardest
was  his  determination  to  “end  poverty  in  our  time.”
The president called it a national disgrace that in the
midst  of  plenty,  one-fifth  of  all  Americans — hidden
from most people’s sight in Appalachia, urban ghettos,
migrant labor camps, and Indian reservations — lived
in poverty. But, Johnson declared, “for the first time in
our history, it is possible to conquer poverty.”

The Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, which cre-
ated  a  series  of  programs  to  reach  these  Americans,
was the president’s answer — what he called the War on
Poverty. This legislation included several different ini-
tiatives.  Head  Start  provided  free  nursery  schools  to
prepare  disadvantaged preschoolers for kindergarten.
The  Job  Corps  and  Upward  Bound  provided  young
people  with  training  and  employment.  Volunteers  in
Service  to  America  (VISTA),  modeled  on  the  Peace
Corps,  offered  technical  assistance  to  the  urban  and
rural poor. An array of regional development programs

focused  on  spurring  economic  growth  in  impover-
ished areas. On balance, the 1964 legislation provided
services  to  the  poor  rather  than  jobs,  leading  some
critics  to  charge  the  War  on  Poverty  with  doing  too
little.

The 1964 Election  With the Civil Rights Act passed
and  his  War  on  Poverty  initiatives  off  the  ground,
Johnson  turned  his  attention  to  the  upcoming  presi-
dential  election.  Not  content  to  govern  in  Kennedy’s
shadow,  he  wanted  a  national  mandate  of  his  own.
Privately, Johnson cast himself less like Kennedy than
as the heir of Franklin Roosevelt and the expansive lib-
eralism  of  the  1930s.  Johnson  had  come  to  Congress
for the first time in 1937 and had long admired FDR’s
political skills. He reminded his advisors never to for-
get “the meek and the humble and the lowly,” because
“President Roosevelt never did.”

In  the  1964  election,  Johnson  faced  Republican
Barry  Goldwater  of  Arizona.  An  archconservative,
Goldwater ran on an anticommunist, antigovernment
platform,  offering  “a  choice,  not  an  echo” — meaning
he represented a genuinely conservative alternative to
liberalism  rather  than  the  echo  of  liberalism  offered
by the moderate wing of the Republican Party (Chap-
ter 25). Goldwater campaigned against the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 and promised a more vigorous Cold War
foreign policy. Among those supporting him was for-
mer  actor  Ronald  Reagan,  whose  speech  on  behalf
of Goldwater at the Republican convention, called “A

