906

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Time  for  Choosing,”  made  him  a  rising  star  in  the
party.

But  Goldwater’s  strident  foreign  policy  alienated
voters. “Extrem ism in the defense of liberty is no vice,”
he told Republicans at the convention. Moreover, there
remained  strong  national  sentiment  for  Kennedy.
Telling  Amer icans  that  he  was  running  to  fulfill
Kennedy’s  legacy,  Johnson  and  his  running  mate,
Hubert H. Humphrey of Minnesota, won in a landslide
(Map  28.1).  In  the  long  run,  Goldwater’s  candidacy
marked  the  beginning  of  a  grassroots  conservative
revolt that would eventually transform the Republican
Party.  In  the  short  run,  however,  Johnson’s  sweeping
victory  gave  him  a  popular  mandate  and,  equally
important, congressional majorities that rivaled FDR’s
in  1935 — just  what  he  needed  to  push  the  Great
Society forward (Table 28.1).

Great  Society  Initiatives  One  of  Johnson’s  first
successes  was  breaking  a  congressional  deadlock  on
education  and  health  care.  Passed  in  April  1965,  the

4

3

6

4

4

4

5

9

6

3

40

3

4

4

5

7

8

25

4

4

43

14

4
8
17
3
10

10

9

12

21

43

26 11

25

7

9

11

10 12

7

29

12

13

8

14

12

6

10

3 Washington, D.C.

Candidate

Lyndon B. Johnson
(Democrat)

Barry M. Goldwater
(Republican)

Electoral
Vote

Popular
Vote

Percent of
Popular Vote

486

43,121,085

61.1

52

27,145,161

38.5

MAP 28.1
The Presidential Election of 1964

This map reveals how one-sided was the victory of
Lyndon Johnson over Barry Goldwater in 1964. Except
for Arizona, his home state, Goldwater won only ﬁve
states in the Deep South — not of much immediate
consolation to him, but a sure indicator that the
South was cutting its historic ties to the Democratic
Party. Moreover, although soundly rejected in 1964,
Goldwater’s far right critique of “big government”
laid the foundation for a Republican resurgence in
the 1980s.

Ele mentary and Secondary Educa tion Act authorized
$1  billion  in  federal  funds  for  teacher  training  and
other educational programs. Standing in his old Texas
schoolhouse, Johnson, a former teacher, said: “I believe
no law I have signed or will ever sign means more to
the  future  of  America.”  Six  months  later,  Johnson
signed  the  Higher  Education  Act,  providing  federal
scholarships for college students. Johnson also had the
votes  he  needed  to  achieve  some  form  of  national
health insurance. That year, he also won passage of two
new programs: Medicare, a health plan for the elderly
funded by a surcharge on Social Security payroll taxes,
and  Medicaid,  a  health  plan  for  the  poor  paid  for  by
general tax revenues and administered by the states.

The Great Society’s agenda included environmental
reform  as  well:  an  expanded  national  park  system,
improvement of the nation’s air and water, protection
for  endangered  species,  stronger  land-use  planning,
and highway beautification. Hardly pausing for breath,
Johnson  oversaw  the  creation  of  the  Department  of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD); won fund-
ing for hundreds of thousands of units of public hous-
ing; made new investments in urban rapid transit such
as the new Washington, D.C., Metro and the Bay Area
Rapid  Transit  (BART)  system  in  San  Francisco;  ush-
ered  new  child  safety  and  consumer  protection  laws
through  Congress;  and  helped  create  the  National
Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment
for the Humanities to support the work of artists, writ-
ers, and scholars.

It even became possible, at this moment of reform
zeal, to tackle the nation’s discriminatory immigration
policy.  The  Immigration  Act  of  1965  abandoned  the
quota system that favored northern Europeans, replac-
ing it with numerical limits that did not discriminate
among  nations.  To  promote  family  reunification,  the
law  also  stipulated  that  close  relatives  of  legal  resi-
dents  in  the  United  States  could  be  admitted  outside
the  numerical  limits,  an  exception  that  especially
benefitted  Asian  and  Latin  American  immigrants.
Since 1965, as a result, immigrants from those regions
have become increasingly visible in American society
(Chapter 31).

Assessing  the  Great  Society  The  Great  Society
enjoyed  mixed  results.  The  proportion  of  Americans
living below the poverty line dropped from 20 percent
to  13  percent  between  1963  and  1968  (Figure  28.1).
Medicare  and  Medicaid,  the  most  enduring  of  the
Great Society programs, helped millions of elderly and
poor citizens afford necessary health care. Further, as
millions of African Americans moved into the middle

