908

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

50

45

40

35
30

25

20
15

10
5

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

Poverty rate

1959 ’61

’63 ’65

’67

’69

’71

’73

’75

’77

’79
Year

’81

’83

’85

’87

’89

’91

’93

’95

’97

’99

FIGURE 28.1
Americans in Poverty, 1959–2000

Between 1959 and 1973 the poverty rate among American families dropped by more than
half — from 23 percent to 11 percent. There was, however, sharp disagreement about the
reasons for that notable decline. Liberals credited the War on Poverty, while conservatives
favored the high-performing economy, with the signiﬁcant poverty dip of 1965–1966 caused
by military spending, not Johnson’s domestic programs.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What new roles did the
federal government
assume under Great Soci-
ety initiatives, and how did
they extend the New Deal
tradition?

class, the black poverty rate fell by
half.  Liberals  believed  they  were
on the right track.

Conservatives,  however,  gave
more  credit  for  these  changes  to
the  decade’s  booming  economy
than  to  government  programs.
Indeed,
critics
conservative
accused Johnson and other liber-
als  of  believing  that  every  social  problem  could  be
solved with a government program. In the final analy-
sis, the Great Society dramatically improved the finan-
cial  situation  of  the  elderly,  reached  millions  of  chil-
dren,  and  increased  the  racial  diversity  of  American
society and workplaces. However, entrenched poverty
remained, racial segregation in the largest cities wors-
ened, and the national distribution of wealth remained
highly skewed. In relative terms, the bottom 20 percent
remained  as  far  behind  as  ever.  In  these  arenas,  the
Great Society made little progress.

Rebirth of the Women’s Movement
The new era of liberal reform reawakened the American
women’s movement. Inspired by the civil rights move-
ment and legislative advances under the Great Society,
but  frustrated  by  the  lack  of  attention  both  gave  to
women,  feminists  entered  the  political  fray  and
demanded  not  simply  inclusion,  but  a  rethinking  of
national priorities.

Labor  Feminists  The  women’s  movement  had  not
languished  entirely  in  the  postwar  years.  Feminist
concerns were kept alive in the 1950s and early 1960s
by working women, who campaigned for such things
as maternity leave and equal pay for equal work. One
historian  has  called  these  women  “labor  feminists,”
because they belonged to unions and fought for equal-
ity and dignity in the workplace. “It became apparent
to me why so many employers could legally discrimi-
nate against women — because it was written right into
the  law,”  said  one  female  labor  activist.  Trade  union
women were especially critical in pushing for, and win-
ning, congressional passage of the 1963 Equal Pay Act,
which established the principle of equal pay for equal
work.

Labor  feminists  were  responding  to  the  times.
More women — including married women (40 percent
by 1970) and mothers with young children (30 percent
by 1970) — were working outside the home than ever
before. But they faced a labor market that undervalued
their  contributions.  Moreover,  most  working  women
faced  the  “double  day”:  they  were  expected  to  earn  a
paycheck and then return home to domestic labor. One
woman  put  the  problem  succinctly:  “The  working
mother has no ‘wife’ to care for her children.”

Betty Friedan and the National Organization for
Women  When Betty Friedan’s indictment of subur-
ban domesticity, The Feminine Mystique, appeared in
1963, it targeted a different audience: college-educated,

