CHAPTER 28

  Uncivil Wars: Liberal Crisis and Conservative Rebirth, 1961–1972

909

middle-class  women  who  found  themselves  not
working for wages but rather stifled by their domestic
routine.  Tens  of  thousands  of  women  read  Friedan’s
book and thought, “She’s talking about me.” The Fem-
inine Mystique became a runaway best-seller. Friedan
persuaded middle-class women that they needed more
than  the  convenience  foods,  improved  diapers,  and
better  laundry  detergents  that  magazines  and  tele-
vision  urged  them  to  buy.  To  live  rich  and  fulfilling
lives,  they  needed  education  and  work  outside  the
home.

Paradoxically,  the  domesticity  described  in  The
Feminine  Mystique  was  already  crumbling.  After  the
postwar baby boom, women were again having fewer
children,  aided  now  by  the  birth  control  pill,  first
marketed  in  1960.  And  as  states  liberalized  divorce
laws, more women were divorcing. Educational levels
were also rising: by 1970, women made up 42 percent
of the college population. All of these changes under-
mined  traditional  gender  roles  and  enabled  many
women to embrace The Feminine Mystique’s liberating
prescriptions.

Government action also made a difference. In 1961,
Kennedy  appointed  the  Presidential  Commission  on
the Status of Women, which issued a 1963 report doc-
umenting job and educational discrimination. A big-
ger breakthrough came when Congress added the word
sex to the categories protected against discrimination

in  the  Civil  Rights  Act  of  1964.
Women  suddenly  had  a  power-
ful  legal  tool  for  fighting  sex
discrimination.

To force compliance with the

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What factors accounted
for the resurgence of femi-
nism in the 1960s?

new  act,  Friedan  and  others,  including  many  labor
feminists  from  around  the  country,  founded  the
National  Organization  for  Women  (NOW)  in  1966.
Modeled on the NAACP, NOW intended to be a civil
rights organization for women, with the aim of bring-
ing  “women  into  full  participation  in . . . American
society now, exercising all the privileges and responsi-
bilities  thereof  in  truly  equal  partnership  with  men.”
Under  Friedan’s  leadership,  membership  grew  to  fif-
teen  thousand  by  1971,  and  NOW  became,  like  the
NAACP, a powerful voice for equal rights.

One of the ironies of the 1960s was the enormous
strain that all of this liberal activism placed on the New
Deal  coalition.  Faced  with  often  competing  demands
from  the  civil  rights  movement,  feminists,  the  poor,
labor  unions,  conservative  southern  Democrats,  the
suburban middle class, and urban political machines,
the  old  Rooseveltian  coalition  had  begun  to  fray.
Johnson hoped that the New Deal coalition was strong
enough  to  negotiate  competing  demands  among  its
own  constituents  while  simultaneously  resisting  con-
servative attacks. In 1965, that still seemed possible. It
would not remain so for long.

National Organization for
Women

Kathryn F. Clarenbach (left) and
Betty Friedan (right) announced
a “Bill of Rights for Women in
1968” to be presented to can-
didates in that election year.
Clarenbach was the ﬁrst
chairwoman of the National
Organization for Women (NOW)
and Friedan the organization’s
ﬁrst president. NOW became a
ﬁxture of the women’s move-
ment and the leading liberal
voice for women’s legal and
social equality. © Bettmann/
Corbis.

