910

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

The Vietnam War Begins
As the accelerating rights revolution placed strain on
the Democratic coalition, the war in Vietnam divided
the  country.  In  a  CBS  interview  before  his  death,
Kennedy  remarked  that  it  was  up  to  the  South
Vietnamese whether “their war” would be won or lost.
But the young president had already placed the United
States  on  a  course  that  would  make  retreat  difficult.
Like other presidents, Kennedy believed that giving up
in  Vietnam  would  weaken  America’s  “credibility.”
Withdrawal “would be a great mistake,” he said.

It is impossible to know how JFK would have man-
aged Vietnam had he lived. What is known is that in
the fall of 1963, Kennedy had lost patience with Ngo
Dinh  Diem,  the  dictatorial  head  of  South  Vietnam
whom the United States had supported since 1955. The
president  let  it  be  known  in  Saigon  that  the  United
States would support a military coup. Kennedy’s hope
was that if Diem, reviled throughout the South because
of  his  brutal  repression  of  political  opponents,  could
be replaced by a popular general or other military fig-
ure,  a  stable  government  would  emerge — one  strong

enough to repel the South Vietnam National Liberation
Front (NLF), or Vietcong. But when Diem was over-
thrown on November 1, the South Vietnamese gener-
als went further than Kennedy’s team  had anticipated
and assassinated both Diem and his brother. This made
the coup look less like an organic uprising and more
like an American plot.

South Vietnam fell into a period of chaos marked
by several coups and defined by the increasing ungov-
ernability of both the cities and countryside. Kennedy
himself was assassinated in late November and would
not  live  to  see  the  grim  results  of  Diem’s  murder:
American engagement in a long and costly civil con-
flict in the name of fighting communism.

inherited  Vietnam

Escalation Under Johnson
Just  as  Kennedy  had
from
Eisenhower,  so  Lyndon  Johnson  inherited  Vietnam
from Kennedy. Johnson’s inheritance was more burden-
some,  however,  for  by  now  only  massive  American
intervention could prevent the collapse of South Viet-
nam  (Map  28.2).  Johnson,  like  Kennedy,  was  a  sub-
scriber to the Cold War tenets of global containment.

C H I N A

MAP 28.2
The Vietnam War, 1968

BURMA

Dien Bien Phu

RedR.

Hanoi

Hai Phong

LAOS

NORTH
VIETNAM

MekongR.

Vientiane

Vinh

Gulf of
Tonkin

Hainan

17th Parallel

THAILAND

Vinh Linh

Dong Hoi

The Vietnam War was a guerrilla war, fought in
skirmishes rather than set-piece battles. Despite
repeated airstrikes, the United States was never
able to halt the ﬂow of North Vietnamese troops
and supplies down the Ho Chi Minh Trail, which
wound through Laos and Cambodia. In January
1968, Vietcong forces launched the Tet offen-
sive, a surprise attack on cities and provincial
centers across South Vietnam. Although the
attackers were pushed back with heavy losses,
the Tet offensive revealed the futility of
American efforts to suppress the Vietcong
guerrillas and marked a turning point in
the war.

W

N

S

E

Demarcation Line
of 1954
Quang Tri
Hue

Da Nang
Tam Ky
Chulai

Quang Ngai

Kon Tum

Qui Nhon

Pleiku
SOUTH
VIETNAM

Da Lat

Nha Trang

Bangkok

Gulf of
Thailand

Ho Chi Minh Trail
Tet attacks, 1968
Communist nations
Nations allied with U.S.
Neutral nations

CAMBODIA

Tonlé
Sap

Phnom Penh

Bo Tuc

Cam Ranh Bay

Tan Son Nhut
My Lai

Can Tho

Ca Mau

Bien Hoa

Saigon

Mekong
Delta

0

0

South
China
Sea

100

200 miles

100

200 kilometers

