CHAPTER 28

  Uncivil Wars: Liberal Crisis and Conservative Rebirth, 1961–1972

911

“I am not going to lose Vietnam,” he vowed on taking
office.  “I  am  not  going  to  be  the  President  who  saw
Southeast Asia go the way China went” (Chapter 25).

Gulf  of Tonkin
It did not take long for Johnson to
place  his  stamp  on  the  war.  During  the  summer  of
1964, the president got reports that North Vietnamese
torpedo boats had fired on the U.S. destroyer Maddox
in the Gulf of Tonkin. In the first attack, on August 2,
the damage inflicted was limited to a single bullet hole;
a second attack, on August 4, later proved to be only
misread radar sightings. To Johnson, it didn’t matter if
the attack was real or imagined; the president believed
a wider war was inevitable and issued a call to arms,
sending his national approval rating from 42 to 72 per-
cent. In the entire Congress, only two senators voted
against his request for authorization to “take all neces-
sary  measures  to  repel  any  armed  attack  against  the
forces  of  the  United  States  and  to  prevent  further
aggression.” The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, as it became
known, gave Johnson the freedom to conduct opera-
tions in Vietnam as he saw fit.

Despite  his  congressional  mandate,  Johnson  was
initially  cautious  about  revealing  his  plans  to  the
American people. “I had no choice but to keep my for-
eign  policy  in  the  wings . . . ,”  Johnson  later  said.  “I
knew that the day it exploded into a major debate on
the  war,  that  day  would  be  the  beginning  of  the  end
of the Great Society.” So he ran in 1964 on the pledge
that  there  would  be  no  escalation — no  American
boys fighting Vietnam’s fight. Privately, he doubted the
pledge could be kept.

The New American Presence  With the 1964 elec-
tion  safely  behind  him,  Johnson  began  an  American

takeover  of  the  war  in  Vietnam
(American  Voices,  p.  912).  The
escalation, beginning in the early
months of 1965, took two forms:
deployment of American ground
troops  and  the  intensification  of
bombing against North Vietnam.
On  March  8,  1965,  the  first

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
In what larger context did
President Johnson view
the Vietnam conﬂict, and
why was he determined to
support South Vietnam?

marines  waded  ashore  at  Da  Nang.  By  1966,  more
than  380,000  American  soldiers  were  stationed  in
Vietnam;  by  1967,  485,000;  and  by  1968,  536,000
(Figure  28.2).  The  escalating  demands  of  General
William Westmoreland, the commander of U.S. forces,
and  Robert  McNamara,  the  secretary  of  defense,
pushed Johnson to Americanize the ground war in an
attempt  to  stabilize  South  Vietnam.  “I  can’t  run  and
pull a Chamberlain at Munich,” Johnson privately told
a reporter in early March 1965, referring to the British
prime minister who had appeased Hitler in 1938.

Meanwhile, Johnson authorized Operation Rolling
Thunder, a massive bombing campaign against North
Vietnam in 1965. Over the entire course of the war, the
United States dropped twice as many tons of bombs on
Vietnam as the Allies had dropped in both Europe and
the  Pacific  during  the  whole  of  World  War  II.  To
McNamara’s surprise, the bombing had little effect on
the  Vietcong’s  ability  to  wage  war  in  the  South.  The
North  Vietnamese  quickly  rebuilt  roads  and  bridges
and moved munitions plants underground. Instead of
destroying  the  morale  of  the  North  Viet namese,
Operation  Rolling  Thunder  hardened  their  will  to
fight. The massive commitment of troops and air power
devastated Vietnam’s countryside, however. After one
harsh  but  not  unusual  engagement,  a  commanding
officer  reported  that  “it  became  necessary  to  destroy

FIGURE 28.2
U.S. Troops in Vietnam, 1960–1973

This ﬁgure graphically tracks Amer-
ica’s involvement in Vietnam. After
Lyndon Johnson decided on escala-
tion in 1964, troop levels jumped
from 23,300 to a peak of 543,000
personnel in 1968. Under Richard
Nixon’s Vietnamization program,
beginning in the summer of 1969,
levels drastically declined; the last
U.S. military forces left South Viet-
nam on March 29, 1973.

m
a
n
t
e
i
V
h
t
u
o
S
n
i

l
e
n
n
o
s
r
e
p
y
r
a
t
i
l
i

.

m
S
U

.

600,000

500,000

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

0

1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973

