A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

The Toll of War

The  Vietnam  War  produced  a  rich  and  graphic  literature:  novels,  journalists’
reports, interviews, and personal letters. These brief selections suggest the war’s
profound impact on those Americans who experienced it ﬁrsthand.

Donald Whitfield

George Olsen

Donald L. Whitﬁeld was a draftee from Alabama who was
interviewed some years after the war.

I’m gonna be honest with you. I had heard some about
Vietnam in 1968, but I was a poor fellow and I didn’t keep
up with it. I was working at a Standard Oil station making
eight dollars a day. I pumped gas and tinkered a little with
cars. I had a girl I saw every now and then, but I still spent
most of my time with a car. When I got my letter from the
draft lady, I appealed it on the reason it was just me and
my sister at home. We were a poor family and they
needed me at home, but it did no good.

My company did a lot of patrolling. We got the rough-

est damn deal. Shit, I thought I was going to get killed
every night. I was terrified the whole time. We didn’t have
no trouble with the blacks. I saw movies that said we done
the blacks wrong, but it wasn’t like that where I was. Let’s
put it like this: they make pretty good soldiers, but they’re
not what we are. White Americans, can’t nobody whip
our ass. We’re the baddest son of a bitches on the face of
this earth. You can take a hundred Russians and twenty-
five Americans, and we’ll whip their ass. . . .

I fly the Rebel flag because this is the South, Bubba.
The American flag represents the whole fifty states. That
flag represents the southern part. I’m a Confederate, I’m
a Southerner. . . .

I feel cheated about Vietnam, I sure do. Political
restrictions — we won every goddamned battle we was
in, but didn’t win the whole goddamn little country. . . .
Before I die, the Democratic-controlled Congress of this
country — and I blame it on ’em — they gonna goddamn
apologize to the Vietnam veterans.

George  Olsen  served  in  Vietnam  from  August  1969  to
March 1970, when he was killed in action. He wrote this
letter to a close female friend.

31 Aug ’69
Dear Red,
Last Monday I went on my first hunter-killer operation. . . .
The frightening thing about it all is that it is so very easy
to kill in war. There’s no remorse, no theatrical “washing
of the hands” to get rid of nonexistent blood, not even any
regrets. When it happens, you are more afraid than you’ve
ever been in your life — my hands shook so much I had
trouble reloading. . . . You’re scared, really scared, and
there’s no thinking about it. You kill because that little
SOB is doing his best to kill you and you desperately want
to live, to go home, to get drunk or walk down the street
on a date again. And suddenly the grenades aren’t going
off any more, the weapons stop and, unbelievably fast it
seems, it’s all over. . . .

I have truly come to envy the honest pacifist who hon-

estly believes that no killing is permissible and can, with
a clear conscience, stay home and not take part in these
conflicts. I wish I could do the same, but I can’t see let-
ting another take my place and my risks over here. . . .
The only reason pacifists such as the Amish can even live
in an orderly society is because someone — be they police
or soldiers — is taking risks to keep the wolves away. . . .
I guess that’s why I’m over here, why I fought so hard to
come here, and why, even though I’m scared most of the
time, I’m content to be here.

Source: From Dear America: Letters Home from Vietnam, edited by Bernard Edelman
for the New York Vietnam Veterans Memorial Commission, published by W.W. Norton
& Company, 1985.

Source: From “Donald L. Whitfield” in Landing Zones: Southern Veterans Remember
Vietnam, by James R. Wilson, pp. 202–211. Copyright 1990, Duke University Press. All
rights reserved. Republished by permission of the copyright holder, www.dukepress.edu.

Arthur E. Woodley Jr.

Special Forces Ranger Arthur E. Woodley Jr. gave this inter-
view a decade after his return.

You had to fight to survive where I grew up. Lower
east Baltimore. . . . It was a mixed-up neighborhood of
Puerto Ricans, Indians, Italians, and blacks. Being that
I’m lightskinned, curly hair, I wasn’t readily accepted in
the black community. I was more accepted by Puerto
Ricans and some rednecks. They didn’t ask what my

912

