race classification was. I went with them to white movies,
white restaurants, and so forth. But after I got older, I
came to the realization that I was what I am and came
to deal with my black peers. . . .

I figured I was just what my country needed. A black

patriot who could do any physical job they could come
up with. Six feet, one hundred and ninety pounds, and
healthy. . . .

I didn’t ask no questions about the war. I thought
communism was spreading, and as an American citizen,
it was my part to do as much as I could to defeat the
Communist from coming here. Whatever America states
is correct was the tradition that I was brought up in. And
I thought the only way I could possibly make it out of the
ghetto was to be the best soldier I possibly could. . . .

Then came the second week of February of ’69. . . .
We recon this area, and we came across this fella, a white
guy, who was staked to the ground. His arms and legs
tied down to stakes. . . . He had numerous scars on his
face where he might have been beaten and mutilated.
And he had been peeled from his upper part of chest
to down to his waist.

Skinned. Like they slit your skin with a knife. And
they take a pair of pliers or a instrument similar, and
they just peel the skin off your body and expose it to
the elements. . . .

And he start to cryin’, beggin’ to die.
He said, “I can’t go back like this. I can’t live like this.

I’m dying. You can’t leave me here like this dying.” . . .

It took me somewhere close to 20 minutes to get my
mind together. Not because I was squeamish about kill-
ing someone, because I had at that time numerous body
counts. Killing someone wasn’t the issue. It was killing
another American citizen, another GI. . . . We buried
him. We buried him. Very deep. Then I cried. . . .

When we first started going into the fields, I would
not wear a finger, ear, or mutilate another person’s body.
Until I had the misfortune to come upon those American
soldiers who were castrated. Then it got to be a game
between the Communists and ourselves to see how many
fingers and ears that we could capture from each other.
After a kill we would cut his finger or ear off as a trophy,
stuff our unit patch in his mouth, and let him die.

With 89 days left in country, I came out of the field.
What I now felt was emptiness. . . . I started seeing the
atrocities that we caused each other as human beings.
I came to the realization that I was committing crimes
against humanity and myself. That I really didn’t believe
in these things I was doin’. I changed.

Source: Wallace Terry, Bloods: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans
(New York: Ballantine, 1984), 243–263.

Gayle Smith

Gayle  Smith  was  a  nurse  in  a  surgical  unit  in  Vietnam  in
1970–1971 and gave this interview a few years later.

I objected to the war and I got the idea into my head of
going there to bring people back. I started thinking about
it in 1966 and knew that I would eventually go when I felt
I was prepared enough. . . .

Boy, I remember how they came in all torn up. It was

incredible. The first time a medevac came in, I got right
into it. I didn’t have a lot of feeling at that time. It was
later on that I began to have a lot of feeling about it, after
I’d seen it over and over and over again. . . . I turned that
pain into anger and hatred and placed it onto the Vietna-
mese. . . . I did not consider the Vietnamese to be people.
They were human, but they weren’t people. They weren’t
like us, so it was okay to kill them. It was okay to hate
them. . . .

I would have dreams about putting a .45 to someone’s
head and see it blow away over and over again. And for a
long time I swore that if the Vietnamese ever came to this
country I’d kill them.

It was in a Vietnam veterans group that I realized that

all my hatred for the Vietnamese and my wanting to kill
them was really a reflection of all the pain that I had felt
for seeing all those young men die and hurt. . . . I would
stand there and look at them and think to myself, “You’ve
just lost your leg for no reason at all.” Or “You’re going to
die and it’s for nothing.” For nothing. I would never, never
say that to them, but they knew it.

Source: Albert Santoli, ed., Everything We Had (New York: Random House, 1981),
141–148.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Why did these four young people end up in Vietnam?
How are their reasons for going to war similar and dif-
ferent?

2.  How would you describe their experiences there?
3.  What are their attitudes about the war, and how were
they changed by it? What do their reﬂections suggest
about Vietnam’s impact on American society?

913

