914

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

the town in order to save it” — a statement that came to
symbolize the terrible logic of the war.

The Johnson administration gambled that Ameri-
can  superiority  in  personnel  and  weaponry  would
ultimately triumph. This strategy was inextricably tied
to political considerations. For domestic reasons, poli-
cymakers  searched  for  an  elusive  middle  ground
between  all-out  invasion  of  North  Vietnam,  which
included the possibility of war with China, and disen-
gagement. “In effect, we are fighting a war of attrition,”
said General Westmoreland. “The only alternative is a
war of annihilation.”

Public Opinion and the War
Johnson gradually grew more confident that his Viet-
nam policy had the support of the American people.
Both Democrats and Republicans approved Johnson’s
escalation in Vietnam, and so did public opinion polls
in  1965  and  1966.  But  then  opinion  began  to  shift
(Thinking Like a Historian, p. 916).

Every night, Americans saw the carnage of war on
their television screens, including images of dead and
wounded  Americans.  One  such  incident  occurred  in
the first months of fighting in 1965. Television reporter
Morley Safer witnessed a marine unit burning the vil-
lage of Cam Ne to the ground. “Today’s operation is the
frustration of Vietnam in miniature,” Safer explained.
America  can  “win  a  military  victory  here,  but  to  a
Vietnamese peasant whose home is [destroyed] it will
take more than presidential promises to convince him
that we are on his side.”

With such firsthand knowledge of the war, journal-
ists began to write about a “credibility gap.” The Johnson
administration, they charged, was concealing bad news
about the war’s  progress. In February 1966, television
coverage  of  hearings  by  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations
Committee  (chaired  by  J.  William  Fulbright,  an  out-
spoken critic of the war) raised further questions about
the administration’s policy. Johnson complained to his
staff  in  1966  that  “our  people  can’t  stand  firm  in  the
face of heavy losses, and they can bring down the gov-
ernment.” Economic problems put Johnson even more
on the defensive. The Vietnam War cost taxpayers $27
billion  in  1967,  pushing  the  federal  deficit  from  $9.8
billion to $23 billion. By then, military spending had
set in motion the inflationary spiral that would plague
the U.S. economy throughout the 1970s.

Out  of  these  troubling  developments,  an  antiwar
movement began to crystallize. Its core, in addition to
long-standing pacifist groups, comprised a new gener-
ation  of  peace  activists  such  as  SANE  (the  National

Committee  for  a  Sane  Nuclear  Policy),  which  in  the
1950s had protested atmospheric nuclear testing. After
the escalation in 1965, the activist groups were joined
by  students,  clergy,  civil  rights  advocates,  and  even
Dr.  Benjamin  Spock,  whose  book  on  child  care  had
helped  raise  many  of  the  younger  activists.  Despite
their  diversity,  these  opponents  of  the  war  shared  a
skepticism about U.S. policy in Vietnam. They charged
variously that intervention was antithetical to American
ideals; that an independent, anticommunist South Viet-
nam was unattainable; and that no American objective
justified  the  suffering  that  was  being  inflicted  on  the
Vietnamese people.

Rise of the Student Movement
College  students,  many  of  them  inspired  by  the  civil
rights movement, had begun to organize and agitate for
social change. In Ann Arbor, Michigan, they founded
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) in 1960. Two
years later, forty students from Big Ten and Ivy League
universities held the first national SDS  convention in
Port Huron, Michigan. Tom Hayden penned a mani-
festo, the  Port  Huron  Statement, expressing students’
disillusionment with the nation’s consumer culture and
the gulf between rich and poor. “We are people of this
generation,”  Hayden  wrote,  “bred  in  at  least  modest
comfort, housed now in universities, looking uncom-
fortably  to  the  world  we  inherit.”  These  students
rejected Cold War foreign policy, including the war in
Vietnam.

The New Left  The founders of SDS referred to their
movement as the  New  Left to distinguish themselves
from the Old Left — communists and socialists of the
1930s and 1940s. As New Left influence spread, it hit
major university towns first — places such as Madison,
Wisconsin,  and  Berkeley,  California.  One  of  the  first
major demonstrations erupted in the fall of 1964 at the
University of California at Berkeley after administrators
banned student political activity on university grounds.
In  protest,  student  organizations  formed  the  Free
Speech Movement and organized a sit-in at the admin-
istration  building.  Some  students  had  just  returned
from Freedom Summer in Mississippi, radicalized by
their experience. Mario Savio spoke for many when he
compared  the  conflict  in  Berkeley  to  the  civil  rights
struggle in the South: “The same rights are at stake in
both  places — the  right  to  participate  as  citizens  in  a
democratic  society  and  to  struggle  against  the  same
enemy.” Emboldened by the Berkeley movement, stu-
dents  across  the  nation  were  soon  protesting  their

