CHAPTER 28

  Uncivil Wars: Liberal Crisis and Conservative Rebirth, 1961–1972

915

Free Speech at Berkeley, 1964

Students at the University of California’s Berkeley campus protested the administration’s decision to ban
political activity in the school plaza. Free speech demonstrators, many of them active in the civil rights
movement, relied on the tactics and arguments that they learned during that struggle. Dr. Jim Jumblatt,
Free Speech Movement Archive.

universities’ academic policies and then, more passion-
ately, the Vietnam War.

One  spur  to  student  protest  was  the  military’s
Selective  Service  System,  which  in  1967  abolished
automatic student deferments. To avoid the draft, some
young men enlisted in the National Guard or applied
for  conscientious  objector  status;  others  avoided  the
draft by leaving the country, most often for Canada or
Sweden.  In  public  demonstrations,  opponents  of  the
war burned their draft cards, picketed induction cen-
ters, and on a few occasions broke into Selective Ser-
vice offices and destroyed records. Antiwar demonstra-
tors  numbered  in  the  tens  or,  at  most,  hundreds  of
thousands — a small fraction of American youth — but
they were vocal, visible, and determined.

Students  were  on  the  front  lines  as  the  campaign
against  the  war  escalated.  The  1967  Mobilization  to
End the War brought 100,000 protesters into the streets
of  San  Francisco,  while  more  than  a  quarter  million
followed Martin Luther King Jr. from Central Park to

the  United  Nations  in  New  York.  Another  100,000
marched on the Pentagon. President Johnson absorbed
the  blows  and  counterpunched — “The  enemy’s  hope
for  victory . . . is  in  our  division,  our  weariness,  our
uncertainty,” he proclaimed — but it had become clear
that  Johnson’s  war,  as  many  began  calling  it,  was  no
longer uniting the country.

Young Americans for Freedom  The New Left was
not  the  only  political  force  on  college  campuses.
Conservative students were less noisy but more numer-
ous. For them, the 1960s was not about protesting the
war,  staging  student  strikes,  and
idolizing  Black  Power.  Inspired
by  the  group  Young  Americans
for  Freedom  (YAF),  conservative
students  asserted  their  faith  in
“God-given  free  will”  and  their
fear  that  the  federal  government
“accumulates  power  which  tends

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
Contrast the political views
of the SDS, the YAF, and
the counterculture. How
would you explain the
differences?

