T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Debating the War

in Vietnam

The war in Vietnam divided Americans and ultimately divided world opinion. A
product of the Cold War policy of containment, the war led many to question
the application of that policy to Southeast Asia. Yet every American president
from Truman to Nixon believed that opposing the uniﬁcation of Vietnam under
communist rule was essential. Historians continue to research, and debate, what
led to the war and what effects the war had on both Vietnam and the United
States. The following documents help us to consider different views of the war.

1.  President Dwight Eisenhower’s “Domino Theory”

3.  President Lyndon Johnson, Johns Hopkins Univer-

speech, April 7, 1954.

sity speech, April 7, 1965.

Finally, you have broader considerations that might fol-
low what you would call the “falling domino” principle.
You have a row of dominoes set up, you knock over the
first one, and what will happen to the last one is the cer-
tainty that it will go over very quickly. So you could have
a beginning of a disintegration that would have the most
profound influences. . . .

But when we come to the possible sequence of events,
the loss of Indochina, of Burma, of Thailand, of the Penin-
sula, and Indonesia following, now you begin to talk about
areas that not only multiply the disadvantages that you
would suffer through loss of materials, sources of materi-
als, but now you’re talking about millions and millions
and millions of people.

2.  Manifesto of the South Vietnam National Front for

Liberation (NLF), 1968.

Over the past hundred years the Vietnamese people
repeatedly rose up to fight against foreign aggression
for the independence and freedom of their fatherland.
In 1945, the people throughout the country surged
up in an armed uprising, overthrew the Japanese
and French domination, and seized power. . . .

However, the American imperialists, who had in
the past helped the French colonialists to massacre our
people, have now replaced the French in enslaving the
southern part of our country through a disguised colo-
nial regime. They have been using their stooge — the
Ngo Dinh Diem administration — in their downright
repression and exploitation of our compatriots, in their
maneuvers to permanently divide our country and to
turn its southern part into a base in preparation for
war in Southeast Asia.

Over this war — and all Asia — is another reality: the
deepening shadow of Communist China. The rulers in
Hanoi are urged on by Peiping [Peiking]. This is a regime
which has destroyed freedom in Tibet, which has attacked
India, and has been condemned by the United Nations for
aggression in Korea. It is helping the forces of violence in
almost every continent. The contest in Viet-Nam is part
of a wider pattern of aggressive purposes.

4.  James Fallows, “What Did You Do in the Class War,
Daddy?” Washington Monthly, October 1975. The
journalist Fallows highlighted the economic unfair-
ness of the Vietnam-era draft.

The children of the bright, good parents were spared the
more immediate sort of suffering that our inferiors were
undergoing. And because of that, when our parents were
opposed to the war, they were opposed in a bloodless,
theoretical fashion, as they might be opposed to political
corruption or racism in South Africa. As long as the little
gold stars [sent to parents whose son was killed in war]
kept going to homes in Chelsea [a working-class part of
Boston] and the backwoods of West Virginia, the moth-
ers of Beverly Hills and Chevy Chase and Great Neck
and Belmont [all affluent suburbs] were not on the tele-
phone to their congressman screaming, “You killed my
boy.” . . . It is clear by now that if the men of Harvard
had wanted to do the very most they could to help
shorten the war, they should have been drafted or
imprisoned en masse.

916

