5.  Students for a Democratic Society, Call for a March

7.  Evacuation of Vietnamese civilians in a burning

on Washington to End the War, 1965.

village, c. 1965.

The current war in Vietnam is being waged on behalf
of a succession of unpopular South Vietnamese dictator-
ships, not in behalf of freedom. No American-supported
South Vietnamese regime in the past few years has gained
the support of its people, for the simple reason that the
people overwhelmingly want peace, self-determination,
and the opportunity for development. American pros-
ecution of the war has deprived them of all three.
The war is fundamentally a civil war. . . .
It is a losing war. . . .
It is a self-defeating war. . . .
It is a dangerous war. . . .
It is a war never declared by Congress. . . .
It is a hideously immoral war.

6.  Richard Nixon, address to the nation on the

Vietnam War, November 3, 1969.

. . . President Eisenhower sent economic aid and military
equipment to assist the people of South Vietnam in
their efforts to prevent a Communist takeover. Seven
years ago, President Kennedy sent 16,000 military per-
sonnel to Vietnam as combat advisors. Four years ago,
President Johnson sent American combat forces to
South Vietnam. . . .

For these reasons, I reject the recommendation that

I should end the war by immediately withdrawing all
our forces. I choose instead to change American policy
on both the negotiating front and the battlefront. . . .

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Three of the sources (1, 3, and 6) feature remarks by

U.S. presidents. What common feature do they share? Are
there differences among the comments? Source 2 is also
an attempt by a political ﬁgure to persuade. How should
historians evaluate such documents?

2.  In source 4, which Americans does the author believe have

sacriﬁced the most in ﬁghting the war in Vietnam?

3.  Compare sources 2 and 5. What is the intended audience of

each? What common features do they share?

4.  Journalists and electronic media (photography and tele-
vision) played an important role in the war. How would

Source: Photo by Dominique BERETTY/Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images.

Sources: (1) George Katsiaficas, ed., Vietnam Documents: American and Vietnamese
Views of the War (Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, Inc., 1992), pp. 120–121. Used by
permission of the author; (2) Katsiaficas, 43–44; (3) John Clark Pratt, Vietnam
Voices: Perspectives on the War Years, 1941–1982 (New York: Penguin Books, 1984),
201; (4) The Washington Monthly, October 1975, 5–19; (5) Katsiaficas, 120–121;
(6) Katsiaficas, 147.

images, such as that in source 7, shape opinion about the
war both in the United States and globally?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Using the knowledge you have gained from this chapter, ana-
lyze the documents above to construct an essay in which you
explore the Vietnam War’s causes and effects, both domestic
and international. Choose at least one domestic and one inter-
national theme and use the documents to providence evidence
for your conclusions.

917

