918

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

to diminish order and liberty.” The YAF, the largest stu-
dent  political  organization  in  the  country,  defended
free enterprise and supported the war in Vietnam. Its
founding  principles  were  outlined  in  “The  Sharon
Statement,” drafted (in Sharon, Connecticut) two years
before the Port Huron Statement, and inspired young
conservatives,  many  of  whom  would  play  important
roles in the Reagan administration in the 1980s.

The Counterculture  While the New Left organized
against the political and economic system and the YAF
defended  it,  many  other  young  Americans  embarked
on a general revolt against authority and middle-class
respectability. The “hippie” — identified by ragged blue
jeans  or  army  fatigues,  tie-dyed  T-shirts,  beads,  and
long  unkempt  hair — symbolized  the  new  counter-
culture.  With  roots  in  the  1950s  Beat  culture  of  New
York’s  Greenwich  Village  and  San  Francisco’s  North
Beach, the 1960s counterculture initially turned to folk

music  for  its  inspiration.  Pete  Seeger  set  the  tone  for
the era’s idealism with songs such as the 1961 antiwar
ballad “Where Have All the Flowers Gone?” In 1963,
the  year  of  the  civil  rights  demonstrations  in  Bir-
mingham and President Kennedy’s assassination, Bob
Dylan’s “Blowin’ in the Wind” reflected the impatience
of  people  whose  faith  in  America  was  wearing  thin.
Joan  Baez  emerged  alongside  Dylan  and  pioneered
a  folk  sound  that  inspired  a  generation  of  female
musicians.

By the mid-1960s, other winds of change in popu-
lar  music  came  from  the  Beatles,  four  working-class
Brits whose awe-inspiring music — by turns lyrical and
driving — spawned  a  commercial  and  cultural  phe-
nomenon  known  as  Beatlemania.  American  youths’
embrace  of  the  Beatles — as  well  as  even  more  rebel-
lious bands such as the Rolling Stones, the Who, and
the Doors — deepened the generational divide between
young people and their elders. So did the recreational

The Counterculture

The three-day outdoor Woodstock concert in August 1969 was a deﬁning moment in the rise of the counter-
culture. The event attracted 400,000 young people, like those pictured here, to Bethel, New York, for a
weekend of music, drugs, and sex. The counterculture was distinct from the New Left and was less a political
movement than a shifting set of cultural styles, attitudes, and practices. It rejected conformity of all kinds and
placed rebellion and contrariness among its highest values. Another concept held dear by the counterculture
was, simply, “love.” In an era of military violence abroad and police violence at home, many in the counter-
culture hoped that “peace and love” would prevail instead. Bill Eppridge/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images.

