CHAPTER 28

  Uncivil Wars: Liberal Crisis and Conservative Rebirth, 1961–1972

919

use  of  drugs — especially  marijuana  and  the  halluci-
nogen  popularly  known  as  LSD  or  acid — which was
celebrated  in  popular  music  in  the  second  half  of
the 1960s.

For  a  brief  time,  adherents  of  the  counterculture
believed  that  a  new  age  was  dawning.  In  1967,  the
“world’s  first  Human  Be-In”  drew  20,000  people  to
Golden  Gate  Park  in  San  Francisco.  That  summer —
called the Summer of Love — San Francisco’s Haight-
Ashbury,  New  York’s  East  Village,  Chicago’s  Uptown
neighborhoods,  and  the  Sunset  Strip  in  Los  Angeles
swelled  with  young  dropouts,  drifters,  and  teenage
runaways whom the media dubbed “flower children.”
Although most young people had little interest in all-
out revolt, media coverage made it seem as though all
of American youth was rejecting the nation’s social and
cultural norms.

Days of Rage, 1968–1972
By 1968, a sense of crisis gripped the country. Riots in
the cities, campus unrest, and a nose-thumbing coun-
terculture escalated into a general youth rebellion that
seemed on the verge of tearing America apart. Calling
1968  “the  watershed  year  for  a  generation,”  SDS
founder  Tom  Hayden  wrote  that  it  “started  with  leg-
endary  events,  then  raised  hopes,  only  to  end  by
immersing  innocence  in  tragedy.”  It  was  perhaps  the
most shocking year in all the postwar decades. Violent
clashes both in Vietnam and back home in the United
States  combined  with  political  assassinations  to  pro-
duce  a  palpable  sense  of  despair  and  hopelessness
(America Compared, p. 920).

War Abroad, Tragedy at Home
President Johnson had gambled in 1965 on a quick vic-
tory in Vietnam, before the political cost of escalation
came  due.  But  there  was  no  quick  victory.  North
Vietnamese and Vietcong forces fought on, the South
Vietnamese  government  repeatedly  collapsed,  and
American casualties mounted. By early 1968, the death
rate of U.S. troops had reached several hundred a week.
Johnson and his generals kept insisting that there was
“light  at  the  end  of  the  tunnel.”  Facts  on  the  ground
showed otherwise.

The Tet  Offensive  On  Janu ary  30,  1968,  the  Viet-
cong unleashed a massive, well-coordinated assault in
South  Vietnam.  Timed  to  coincide  with  Tet,  the
Vietnamese  new  year,  the  offensive  struck  thirty-six

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
What changed between
1965 and 1968, and how
did these developments
affect national political
life?

provincial capitals and five of the
six major cities, including Saigon,
where  the  Vietcong  nearly  over-
ran  the  U.S.  embassy.  In  strictly
military  terms,  the  Tet  offensive
was  a  failure,  with  very  heavy
Vietcong  losses.  But  psychologi-
cally,  the  effect  was  devastating.
Tele vision brought into Amer ican homes shocking live
images:  the  American  embassy  under  siege  and  the
Saigon  police  chief  placing  a  pistol  to  the  head  of  a
Vietcong suspect and executing him.

The Tet offensive made a mockery of official pro-
nouncements that the United States  was winning the
war.  How  could  an  enemy  on  the  run  manage  such
a  large-scale,  complex,  and  coordinated  attack?  Just
before  Tet,  a  Gallup  poll  found  that  56  percent  of
Americans considered themselves “hawks” (supporters
of the war), while only 28 percent identified with the
“doves” (war opponents). Three months later, doves out-
numbered hawks 42 to 41 percent. Without embracing
the  peace  movement,  many  Americans  simply  con-
cluded that the war was unwinnable.

The  Tet  offensive  undermined  Johnson  and  dis-
credited his war policies. When the 1968 presidential
primary season got under way in March, antiwar sena-
tors  Eugene  McCarthy  of  Minnesota  and  Robert
Kennedy  of  New  York,  JFK’s  brother,  challenged
Johnson for the Democratic nomination. Discouraged,
perhaps  even  physically  exhausted,  on  March  31
Johnson  stunned  the  nation  by  announcing  that  he
would not seek reelection.

Political  Assassinations  Americans  had  barely
adjusted to the news that a sitting president would not
stand for reelection when, on April 4, James Earl Ray
shot  and  killed  Martin  Luther  King  Jr.  in  Memphis.
Riots erupted in more than a hundred cities. The worst
of them, in Baltimore, Chicago, and Washington, D.C.,
left dozens dead and hundreds of millions of dollars in
property  damaged  or  destroyed.  The  violence  on  the
streets  of  Saigon  had  found  an  eerie  parallel  on  the
streets of the United States.

One city that did not erupt was Indianapolis. There,
Robert Kennedy, in town campaigning in the Indiana
primary,  gave  a  quiet,  somber  speech  to  the  black
community  on  the  night  of  King’s  assassination.
Americans  could  continue  to  move  toward  “greater
polarization,”  Kennedy  said,  “black  people  amongst
blacks, white amongst whites,” or “we can replace that
violence . . . with  an  effort  to  understand,  compas-
sion  and  love.”  Kennedy  sympathized  with  African

