A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

The Global Protests

of 1968

Nineteen sixty-eight was a year of youthful protest, political unrest, and violence
across the globe. The year of massive antiwar protests at the Democratic National
Convention in Chicago as well as the assassinations of Martin Luther King Jr. and
Robert Kennedy saw equal or greater turmoil around the world. Half of Italy’s
universities were occupied; a massive student strike in France turned into a vio-
lent confrontation with police; prodemocracy students in Mexico City led huge
protests  that  drew  police  gunﬁre;  and  protests  and  street  battles  with  police
took place in Prague, Berlin, Tokyo, Rome, and London.

René Bourrigaud, French Student

My most vivid memory of May ’68? The new-found
ability for everyone to speak — to speak of anything with
anyone. In that month of talking during May you learnt
more than in the whole of your five years of studying.

Source: Ronald Fraser, 1968: A Student Generation in Revolt (New York: Pantheon
Books, 1988), 9.

The “Two Thousand Words” Manifesto, June 27, 1968,
Prague, Czechoslovakia

Throughout the spring and summer of 1968, the govern-
ment  of  Czechoslovakia,  under  new  communist  leader-
ship, pursued reforms pushed by students and other pro-
testers.  In  August,  the  Soviet  Union  invaded  and  put  an
end to the new openness.

This spring a great opportunity was given to us once
again, as it was at the end of the war [World War II].
Again we have the chance to take into our own hands
our common cause, which for working purposes we will
call socialism, and give it a form more appropriate to our
once-good reputation and to the fairly good opinion we
used to have of ourselves.

Source: Jaromír Navrátil, The Prague Spring 1968: A National Security Archive
Documents Reader (Budapest: Central European University Press, 1998), 181.

Interview with Participants in 1968 Protests in Mexico
City

During the summer of 1968, hundreds of thousands of stu-
dents  protested  against  Mexico’s  authoritarian  national
government and brutal police repression.

Sergio Aguayo: It was, in a symbolic way, the clash of a
new Mexico and an old Mexico.
Antonio Azuela: You have a middle class with eyes closed
and a group of students saying, this was not a democracy.
And this is not working.
Marcela Fernandez de Violante: And so we were together
hundred and hundreds and hundreds. We had these big,
big meetings at the campus crowded, crowded. And people
singing, Que Vivan los Estudiantes . . . ta-ri-ra-ra-ra-ra.
Marcela Fernandez de Violante: We were very young, very
naive. But for the first time, you had this notion that this
country was going to be changed by the power of our
convictions.
Miguel Breseda: You would get in a bus and give a speech
and inform the people. Because newspaper wouldn’t pub-
lish anything. And people would give you money, they
would congratulate you and they would say, “We are with
you young people. . . .”

Source: Produced by Radio Diaries (radiodiaries.org) and originally broadcast on
NPR’s All Things Considered. To hear the entire documentary, visit radiodiaries.org.
Used by permission of Radio Diaries.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Why did free speech ﬁgure so prominently in the protests

of the 1960s?

2.  What do all of these activists seem to be struggling for,
or against? How do their struggles seem similar to — or
different from — those occurring simultaneously in the
United States?

Americans’ outrage at whites, but he begged them not
to strike back in retribution. Impromptu and heartfelt,
Kennedy’s speech was a plea to follow King’s nonvio-
lent example, even as the nation descended into greater
violence.

But two months later, having emerged as the front-
runner  for  the  Democratic  presidential  nomination,
Kennedy, too, would be gone. On June 5, as he was cel-
ebrating  his  victory  in  the  California  primary  over
Eugene McCarthy, Kennedy was shot dead by a young

920

