CHAPTER 28

  Uncivil Wars: Liberal Crisis and Conservative Rebirth, 1961–1972

921

Robert Kennedy

After the assassination of
Martin Luther King Jr. and
with President Johnson out
of the presidential race, Robert
Kennedy emerged in 1968 as
the leading liberal ﬁgure in the
nation. A critic of the Vietnam
War, a strong supporter of civil
rights, and committed to ﬁght-
ing poverty, Kennedy (the
brother of the late President
John Kennedy) ran a progressive
campaign for president. In this
photograph he is shown shaking
hands with supporters in Detroit
in May 1968. However, less than
three weeks after this picture
was taken, Kennedy, too, was
dead, the victim of yet another
assassination. Andrew Sacks/Getty
Images.

Palestinian  named  Sirhan  Sirhan.  Amid  the  national
mourning  for  yet  another  political  murder,  one
newspaper columnist declared that “the country does
not  work  anymore.”  Newsweek  asked,  “Has  violence
become a way of life?” Kennedy’s assassination was a
calamity  for  the  Democratic  Party  because  only  he
had seemed able to surmount the party’s fissures over
Vietnam.  In  the  space  of  eight  weeks,  American  lib-
erals  had  lost  two  of  their  most  important  national
figures,  King  and  Kennedy.  A  third,  Johnson,  was
unpopular  and  politically  damaged.  Without  these
unifying leaders, the crisis of liberalism had become
unmanageable.

The Antiwar Movement
and the 1968 Election
Before their deaths, Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert
Kennedy  had  spoken  eloquently  against  the  Vietnam
War. To antiwar activists, however, bold speeches and
marches had not produced the desired effect. “We are
no  longer  interested  in  merely  protesting  the  war,”
declared one. “We are out to stop it.” They sought noth-
ing short of an immediate American withdrawal. Their
anger  at  Johnson  and  the  Democratic  Party — fueled
by news of the Tet offensive, the murders of King and
Kennedy, and the general youth rebellion — had radi-
calized the movement.

Democratic  Convention
In  August,  at  the  1968
Democratic National Convention in Chicago, the polit-
ical divisions generated by the war consumed the party.
Thousands  of  protesters  descended  on  the  city.  The
most  visible  group,  led  by  Jerry  Rubin  and  Abbie
Hoffman, a remarkable pair of troublemakers, claimed
to  represent  the  Youth  International  Party.  To  mock
those inside the convention hall, these “Yippies” nomi-
nated a pig, Pigasus, for president. The Yippies’ stunts
were geared toward maximum media exposure. But a
far larger and more serious group of activists had come
to  Chicago  to  demonstrate  against  the  war  as  well —
and  they  staged  what  many  came  to  call  the  Siege  of
Chicago.

Democratic  mayor  Richard  J.  Daley  ordered  the
police to break up the demonstrations. Several nights
of  skirmishes  between  protesters  and  police  culmi-
nated on the evening of the nominations. In what an
official report later described as a “police riot,” police
officers attacked protesters with tear gas and clubs. As
the nominating speeches proceeded, television networks
broadcast scenes of the riot, cementing a popular impres-
sion of the Democrats as the party of disorder. “They
are  going  to  be  spending  the  next  four  years  picking
up  the  pieces,”  one  Republican  said  gleefully.  Inside
the  hall,  the  party  dispiritedly  nominated  Hubert  H.
Humphrey,  Johnson’s  vice  president.  The  delegates
approved a middle-of-the-road platform that endorsed

