922

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

continued  fighting  in  Vietnam  while  urging  a  diplo-
matic solution to the conflict.

Richard  Nixon  On  the  Republican  side,  Richard
Nixon had engineered a remarkable political comeback.
After losing the presidential campaign in 1960 and the
California  gubernatorial  race  in  1962,  he  won  the
Republican  presidential  nomination  in  1968.  Sens ing
Democratic weakness, Nixon and his advisors believed
there were two groups of voters ready to switch sides:
northern working-class voters and southern whites.

Tired of the antiwar movement, the counterculture,
and urban riots, northern blue-collar voters, especially
Catholics, had drifted away from the Democratic Party.
Growing  up  in  the  Great  Depression,  these  families
were admirers of FDR and perhaps even had his picture
on their living-room wall. But times had changed over
three decades. To show how much they had changed,
the  social  scientists  Ben  J.  Wattenberg  and  Richard
Scammon  profiled  blue-collar  workers  in  their  study
The  Real  Majority  (1970).  Wattenberg  and  Scammon
asked their readers to consider people such as a forty-
seven-year-old  machinist’s  wife  from  Dayton,  Ohio:
“[She] is afraid to walk the streets
alone at night. . . . She has a mixed
view about blacks and civil rights.”
Moreover,  they  wrote,  “she  is
deeply  distressed  that  her  son  is
going to a community junior col-
lege where LSD was found on cam-
pus.”  Such  northern  blue-collar

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Why might a Democratic
supporter of FDR in the
1940s have decided to vote
for Republican Richard
Nixon in 1968?

families were once reliable Demo cratic voters, but their
political  loyalties  were  increasingly  up  for  grabs — a
fact Republicans knew well.

George  Wallace  Working-class  anxieties  over  stu-
dent protests and urban riots were first exploited by the
controversial governor of Alabama, George C. Wallace.
Running  in  1968  as  a  third-party  presidential  candi-
date,  Wallace  traded  on  his  fame  as  a  segregationist
governor. He had tried to stop the federal government
from desegregating the University of Ala bama in 1963,
and he was equally obstructive during the Selma crisis
of 1965. Appealing to whites in both the North and the
South, Wallace called for “law and order” and claimed
that  mothers  on  public  assistance  were,  thanks  to
Johnson’s  Great  Society,  “breeding  children  as  a  cash
crop.”

Wallace’s  hope  was  that  by  carrying  the  South,
he could deny a major candidate an electoral majority
and  force  the  election  into  the  House  of  Representa-
tives. That strategy failed, as Wallace finished with just
13.5  percent  of  the  popular  vote.  But  he  had  defined
hot-button  issues — liberal  elitism,  welfare  policies,
and  law  and  order — that  became  hallmarks  for  the
next generation of mainstream conservatives.

Nixon’s Strategy  Nixon offered a subtler version of
Wallace’s populism in a two-pronged approach to the
campaign.  He  adopted  what  his  advisors  called  the
“southern strategy,” which aimed at attracting southern
white voters still smarting over the civil rights gains by

George Wallace

George Wallace had become
famous as the segregationist
governor who stood “in the
schoolhouse door” to prevent
black students from enrolling at
the University of Alabama in
1963 (though after being con-
fronted by federal marshals, he
stepped aside). In 1968, he cam-
paigned for the Democratic
presidential nomination on a
populist “law and order” plat-
form that appealed to many
blue-collar voters concerned
about antiwar protests, urban
riots, and the rise of the counter-
culture. In this 1968 photograph,
Wallace greets supporters on the
campaign trail. Lee Balterman/Time
Life Pictures/Getty Images.

