CHAPTER 28

  Uncivil Wars: Liberal Crisis and Conservative Rebirth, 1961–1972

923

These

African  Americans.  Nixon  won  over  the  key  south-
erner,  Democrat-turned-Republican  senator  Strom
Thurmond of South Carolina, the 1948 Dixiecrat pres-
idential  nominee.  Nixon  informed  Thurmond  that
while formally he had to support civil rights, his admin-
istration would go easy on enforcement. He also cam-
paigned  against  the  antiwar  movement,  urban  riots,
and protests, calling for a strict adherence to “law and
order.” He pledged to represent the “quiet voice” of the
“great majority of Americans, the forgotten Americans,
the nonshouters, the nondemonstrators.” Here Nixon
was  speaking  not  just  to  the  South,  but  to  the  many
millions  of  suburban  voters  across  the  country  who
worried that social disorder had gripped the nation.
strategies — southern  and

suburban —
worked.  Nixon  received  43.4  percent  of  the  vote  to
Humphrey’s  42.7  percent,  defeating  him  by  a  scant
500,000  votes  out  of  the  73  million  that  were  cast
(Map  28.3).  But  the  numerical  closeness  of  the  race
could not disguise the devastating blow to the Demo-
crats.  Humphrey  received  almost  12  million  fewer
votes  than  Johnson  had  in  1964.  The  white  South
largely  abandoned  the  Democratic  Party,  an  exodus
that would accelerate in the 1970s. In the North, Nixon
and  Wallace  made  significant  inroads  among  tradi-
tionally Democratic voters. New Deal Democrats lost
the  unity  of  purpose  that  had  served  them  for  thirty
years.  A  nation  exhausted  by  months  of  turmoil  and
violence had chosen a new direction. Nixon’s victory in
1968  foreshadowed — and  helped  propel — a  national
electoral realignment in the coming decade.

The Nationalist Turn
Vietnam  and  the  increasingly  radical  youth  rebellion
intersected  with  the  turn  toward  racial  and  ethnic
nationalism by young African American and Chicano
activists. As we saw in Chapter 27, the Black Power and
Chicano  movements  broke  with  the  liberal  “rights”
politics  of  an  older  generation  of  leaders.  These  new
activists expressed fury at the poverty and white racism
that  were  beyond  the  reach  of  civil  rights  laws;  they
also saw Vietnam as an unjust war against other people
of color.

In this spirit, the Chicano Moratorium Committee
organized  demonstrations  against  the  war.  Chanting
“Viva la Raza, Afuera Vietnam” (“Long live the Chicano
people, Get out of Vietnam”), 20,000 Mexican Ameri-
cans  marched  in  Los  Angeles  in  August  1970.  At
another rally, Cesar Chavez said: “For the poor it is a
terrible irony that they should rise out of their misery
to do battle against other poor people.” He and other

9

6

4

4

3

3

4

40

6

5

4

3

4

43

14

4
8
17
3
10

4

4

5

10

9

12

21

26 13

26

43

29

7

12

1

12

8

14

9

11

7 10

12

7

8

25

12

6

10

4

3 Washington, D.C.

Candidate

Richard M. Nixon
(Republican)

Electoral
Vote

Popular
Vote

Percent of
Popular Vote

301

31,770,237

43.4

Hubert H. Humphrey
(Democrat)

George C. Wallace
(American Independent)

191

31,270,533

42.7

46

9,906,141

13.5

Minor parties

239,908

MAP 28.3
The Presidential Election of 1968

With Lyndon B. Johnson’s surprise withdrawal and the
assassination of the party’s most charismatic contender,
Robert Kennedy, the Democrats faced the election of
1968 in disarray. Governor George Wallace of Alabama,
who left the Democrats to run as a third-party candi-
date, campaigned on the backlash against the civil
rights movement. As late as mid-September Wallace
held the support of 21 percent of the voters. But in
November he received only 13.5 percent of the vote,
winning ﬁve southern states. Republican Richard M.
Nixon, who like Wallace emphasized “law and order”
in his campaign, defeated Hubert H. Humphrey with
only 43.4 percent of the popular vote, but it was now
clear, given that Wallace’s southern support would
otherwise have gone to Nixon, that the South had
shifted decisively to the Republican side.

Mexican American activists charged that the draft was
biased  against  the  poor — like  most  wars  in  history,
Vietnam was, in the words of one retired army colonel,
“a poor boy’s fight.”

Among  African  Americans,  the  Black  Panther
Party and the National Black Antiwar Antidraft League
spoke out against the war. “Black Americans are con-
sidered to be the world’s biggest fools,” Eldridge Cleaver
of the Black Panther Party wrote in his typically acerbic
style, “to go to another country to fight for something
they  don’t  have  for  themselves.”  Muhammad  Ali,  the
most famous boxer in the world, refused his army induc-
tion. Sentenced to prison, Ali was eventually acquitted
on  appeal.  But  his  action  cost  him  his  heavyweight

