924

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Muhammad Ali Refuses Army Induction

On April 28, 1967, heavyweight champion boxer
Muhammad Ali refused to be drafted into the U.S.
Army, claiming that the war in Vietnam was immoral
and that as a member of the Nation of Islam he was a
conscientious objector. In this photograph, Ali stands
outside the U.S. Army induction center in Houston,
Texas. Ali’s refusal, which was applauded by the anti-
war movement, led to a ﬁve-year prison sentence.
Though that conviction was overturned in 1971 after
numerous appeals, Ali’s stand against the war cost
him his heavyweight boxing title. © Bettmann/Corbis.

Power activists and the self-dramatization of the coun-
terculture,  women’s  liberation  sought  an  end  to  the
denigration and exploitation of women. “Sisterhood is
powerful!”  read  one  women’s  liberationist  manifesto.
The  national  Women’s  Strike  for  Equality  in  August
1970  brought  hundreds  of  thousands  of  women  into
the  streets  of  the  nation’s  cities  for  marches  and
demonstrations.

By  that  year,  new  terms  such  as  sexism  and  male
chauvinism  had  become  part  of  the  national  vocabu-
lary.  As  converts  flooded  in,  the  two  branches  of  the
women’s movement began to converge. Radical women
realized that key feminist goals — child care, equal pay,
and  reproduction  rights — could  best  be  achieved  in
the political arena. At the same time, more traditional
activists,  exemplified  by  Betty  Friedan,  developed  a
broader  view  of  women’s  oppression.  They  came  to
understand  that  women  required  more  than  equal
opportunity: the culture that regarded women as noth-
ing  more  than  sexual  objects  and  helpmates  to  men
had to change as well. Although still largely white and
middle class, feminists began to think of themselves as
part of a broad social crusade.

“Sisterhood”  did  not  unite  all  women,  however.
Rather than joining white-led women’s liberation orga-
nizations, African Amer i can and Latina women con-
tinued to work within the larger framework of the civil
rights movement. New groups such as the Combahee
River  Collective  and  the  National  Black  Feminist
Organization arose to speak for the concerns of African
American  women.  They  criticized  sexism  but  were
reluctant to break completely with black men and the

title, and for years he was not allowed to box profes-
sionally in the United States.

Women’s Liberation
Among  women,  1968  also  marked  a  break  with  the
past. The late 1960s spawned a new brand of feminism:
women’s  liberation.  These  feminists  were  primarily
younger, college-educated women fresh from the New
Left, antiwar, and civil rights movements. Those move-
ments’ male leaders, they discovered, considered women
little more than pretty helpers who typed memos and
fetched  coffee.  Women  who  tried  to  raise  feminist
issues at civil rights and antiwar events were shouted
off the platform with jeers such as “Move on, little girl,
we have more important issues to
talk  about  here  than  women’s
liberation.”

Fed up with second-class sta-
tus, and well versed in the tactics
of  organization  and  protest,
women  radicals  broke  away  and
organized  on  their  own.  Unlike
the  National  Organization  for  Women  (NOW),  the
women’s liberation movement was loosely structured,
comprising an alliance of collectives in New York, San
Francisco,  Bos ton,  and  other  big  cities  and  college
towns. “Women’s lib,” as it was dubbed by a skeptical
media, went public in 1968 at the Miss Amer ica pag-
eant. Demon strators carried posters of women’s bodies
labeled as slabs of beef — implying that society treated
them as meat. Mirroring the identity politics of Black

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did women’s libera-
tion after 1968 differ from
the women’s movement of
the early 1960s?

