CHAPTER 28

  Uncivil Wars: Liberal Crisis and Conservative Rebirth, 1961–1972

925

access  to  abortion,  and  railed  against  a  culture  that
blamed women in cases of sexual assault and turned a
blind eye to sexual harassment in the workplace.

Meanwhile, women’s opportunities expanded dra-
matically in higher education. Dozens of formerly all-
male bastions such as Yale, Princeton, and the U.S. mil-
itary  academies  admitted  women  undergraduates  for
the  first  time.  Colleges  started  women’s  studies  pro-
grams,  which  eventually  numbered  in  the  hundreds,
and the proportion of women attending graduate and
professional schools rose markedly. With the adoption
of Title IX in 1972, Congress broadened the 1964 Civil
Rights Act to include educational institutions, prohib-
iting  colleges  and  universities  that  received  federal
funds  from  discriminating  on  the  basis  of  sex.  By
requiring  comparable  funding  for  sports  programs,
Title IX made women’s athletics a real presence on col-
lege campuses.

Women also became increasingly visible in public
life. Congresswomen Bella Abzug and Shirley Chisholm
joined Betty Friedan and Gloria Steinem, the founder
of Ms. magazine, to create the National Women’s Polit-
ical Caucus in 1971. Abzug and Chisholm, both from
New  York,  joined  Congresswomen  Patsy  Mink  from
Hawaii and Martha Griffiths from Michigan to spon-
sor equal rights legislation. Congress authorized child-
care tax deductions for working parents in 1972 and in
1974 passed the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which
enabled married women to get credit, including credit
cards and mortgages, in their own names.

Antiwar  activists,  black  and  Chicano  nationalists,
and  women’s  liberationists  had  each  challenged  the
Cold War liberalism of the Democratic Party. In doing
so, they helped build on the “rights liberalism” forged
first  by  the  African  American–led  civil  rights  move-
ment.  But  they  also  created  rifts  among  competing
parts of the former liberal consensus. Many Catholics,
for  instance,  opposed  abortion rights  and  other  free-
doms  sought  by  women’s  liberationists.  Still  other
Democrats, many of them blue-collar trade unionists,
believed  that  antiwar  protesters  were  unpatriotic  and
that supporting one’s government in time of war was a
citizen’s duty. The antiwar movement and the evolving
rights  liberalism  of  the  sixties  had  made  the  old
Democratic coalition increasingly unworkable.

Stonewall and Gay Liberation
The  liberationist  impulse  transformed  the  gay  rights
movement  as  well.  Homophile  activists  in  the  1960s
(Chapter 26) had pursued rights by protesting, but they
adopted the respectable dress and behavior they knew

Ms. Magazine

Cofounded by the feminist Gloria Steinem, Ms. magazine made
its initial appearance in 1972. Steinem and her cofounders
believed that American women needed an explicitly feminist
magazine distinct from the slew of available female-focused
“lifestyle” magazines, such as McCall’s and Redbook. Ms.
would take on crucial, but neglected, issues relevant to
women: reproductive rights, child care, employment and
educational equality, sexual harassment, and marriage and
relations between men and women. Inspired by women’s
liberation, Ms. has remained an important forum for femi-
nist opinion and debate down to the present. Reprinted by
permission of Ms. magazine, © 1972.

struggle  for  racial  equality.  Chicana  feminists  came
from Catholic backgrounds in which motherhood and
family  were  held  in  high  regard.  “We  want  to  walk
hand in hand with the Chicano brothers, with our chil-
dren, our viejitos [elders], our Familia de la Raza,” one
Chicana feminist wrote. Black and Chicana feminists
embraced the larger movement for women’s rights but
carried on their own struggles to address specific needs
in their communities.

One  of  the  most  important  contributions  of
women’s liberation was to raise awareness about what
feminist Kate Millett called sexual politics. Liberation-
ists argued that unless women had control over their
own bodies, they could not freely shape their destinies.
They  campaigned  for  reproductive  rights,  especially

