926

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

rights.  A  gay  newspaper  in  New  York  bore  the  title
Come Out!

The new gay liberation found multiple expressions
in major cities across the country, but a defining event
occurred in New York’s Greenwich Village. Police had
raided gay bars for decades, making arrests, publiciz-
ing  the  names  of  patrons,  and  harassing  customers
simply for being gay. When a local gay bar called the
Stonewall Inn was raided by police in the summer of
1969, however, its patrons rioted for two days, burning
the bar and battling with police in the narrow streets of
the  Village.  Decades  of  police  repression  had  taken
their toll. Few commentators excused the violence, and
the Stonewall riots were not repeated, but activists cel-
ebrated them as a symbolic demand for full citizenship.
The gay liberation movement grew quickly after Stone-
wall. Local gay and lesbian organizations proliferated,
and  activists  began  pushing  for  nondiscrimination
ordinances and consensual sex laws at the state level.
By 1975, the National Gay Task Force and other national
organizations lobbied Congress, served as media watch-
dogs, and advanced suits in the courts. Despite all the
activity, progress was slow; in most arenas of American
life, gays and lesbians did not enjoy the same legal pro-
tections and rights as other Americans.

Richard Nixon and the Politics
of the Silent Majority
Vietnam  abroad  and  the  antiwar  movement  and  the
counterculture  at  home  tore  at  the  fabric  of  the
Democratic  coalition  and  proved  too  difficult  for
Lyndon  Johnson  to  navigate.  Richard  Nixon,  in  con-
trast, showed himself adept at taking advantage of the
nation’s  unrest  through  carefully  timed  speeches  and
displays  of  moral  outrage.  A  centrist  by  nature  and
temperament, Nixon was not part of the conservative
Goldwater  wing  of  the  Republican  Party.  Though  he
was  an  ardent  anticommunist  like  Goldwater,  Nixon
also  shared  some  of  Eisenhower’s  traits,  including  a
basic  acceptance  of  government’s  role  in  economic
matters. Nixon is thus most profitably viewed as a tran-
sitional  figure,  a  national  politician  who  formed  a
bridge between the liberal postwar era and the much
more conservative decades that followed the 1970s.

In  late  1969,  following  a  massive  antiwar  rally  in
Washington, President Nixon gave a televised speech
in  which  he  referred  to  his  supporters  as  the  silent
majority. It  was classic Nixonian rhetoric. In a single
phrase,  he  summed  up  a  generational  and  cultural

A Lesbian and Gay Rights Protest in Greenwich
Village, New York City, 1970

Building on the momentum of the Black Power and women’s
liberation movements of the late 1960s, a gay liberation
movement had emerged by the early 1970s. Its history was
longer than most Americans recognized, dating to the homo-
phile movement of the 1950s, but the struggle for gay and
lesbian rights and freedoms gained new adherents after the
Stonewall riots of 1969. Under the banner of “coming out,”
lesbian and gay Americans refused to accept second-class
citizenship. Rue des Archives/The Granger Collection, NYC.

straight society demanded. Meanwhile, the vast major-
ity  of  gay  men  and  lesbians  remained  “in  the  closet.”
So  many  were  closeted  because  homosexuality  was
considered  immoral  and  was  even  illegal  in  the  vast
majority  of  states — sodomy  statutes  outlawed  same-
sex  relations,  and  police  used
other  morals  laws  to  harass  and
arrest  gay  men  and  lesbians.  In
the  late  1960s,  however,  inspired
by the Black Power and women’s
movements, gay activists increas-
ingly  demanded  immediate  and
unconditional recognition of their

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the antiwar
movement, women’s
liberation, and gay libera-
tion break with an earlier
liberal politics?

