CHAPTER 28

  Uncivil Wars: Liberal Crisis and Conservative Rebirth, 1961–1972

927

struggle, placing himself on the side of ordinary Ameri-
cans against the rabble-rousers and troublemakers. It
was an oversimplification, but the label silent majority
stuck, and Nixon had defined a political phenomenon.
For the remainder of his presidency, Nixon cultivated
the impression that he was the defender of a reasonable
middle ground under assault from the radical left.

fighting to the South Vietnamese. Under this new pol-
icy of Viet nam ization, American troop levels dropped
from  543,000  in  1968  to  334,000  in  1971  to  barely
24,000  by  early  1973.  American  casualties  dropped
correspondingly. But the killing in Vietnam continued.
As Ellsworth Bunker, the U.S. ambassador to Vietnam,
noted  cynically,  it  was  just  a  matter  of  changing  “the
color of the bodies.”

Nixon in Vietnam
On  the  war  in  Vietnam,  Nixon  picked  up  where
Johnson had left off. Cold War assumptions continued
to  dictate  presidential  policy.  Abandoning  Vietnam,
Nixon  insisted,  would  damage  America’s  “credibility”
and make the country seem “a pitiful, helpless giant.”
Nixon wanted peace, but only “peace with honor.” The
North Vietnamese were not about to oblige him. The
only outcome acceptable to them was a unified Vietnam
under their control.

Vietnamization and Cambodia  To neutralize criti-
cism  at  home,  Nixon  began  delegating  the  ground

Far from abating, however, the antiwar movement
intensified. In November 1969, half a million demon-
strators  staged  a  huge  protest  in
Washington  called  the  Vietnam
Moratorium.  On  April  30,  1970,
as part of a secret bombing cam-
paign  against  Vietcong  supply
lines, American troops destroyed
enemy bases in neutral Cambodia.
When  news  of  the  invasion  of  Cam bodia  came  out,
American  campuses  exploded  in  outrage — and,  for
the first time, students died. On May 4, 1970, at Kent
State University in Ohio, panicky National Guardsmen
fired  into  an  antiwar  rally,  wounding  eleven  students

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How was President Nixon’s
Vietnam policy different
from President Johnson’s?

Richard Nixon

Richard Nixon completed one of the more remarkable political rehabilitations in modern times. He had lost
the 1960 presidential election and the 1962 California gubernatorial election. But he came back strong in
1968 to ride — and help direct — a growing wave of reaction among conservative Americans against Great
Society liberalism, the antiwar movement, civil rights, and the counterculture. In this photograph, President
Nixon greets supporters in June 1969, just a few months after his inauguration. © Wally McNamee/Corbis.

