928

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Prowar Rally

Under a sea of American ﬂags, construction workers in New York City march in support of the Vietnam War.
Wearing hard hats, tens of thousands of marchers jammed Broadway for four blocks opposite City Hall, and
the overﬂow crammed the side streets. Working-class patriotism became a main source of support for
Nixon’s war. Paul Fusco/Magnum Photos, Inc.

and killing four. Less than two weeks  later,  at  Jackson
State  College  in  Mississippi,  Guardsmen  stormed  a
dormitory, killing two black students. More than 450
colleges  closed  in  protest.  Across  the  country,  the
spring semester was essentially canceled.

My  Lai  Massacre  Meanwhile,  one  of  the  worst
atrocities of the war had become public. In 1968, U.S.
Army troops had executed nearly five hundred people
in the South Vietnamese village of My Lai, including a
large  number  of  women  and  children.  The  massacre
was known only within the military until 1969, when
journalist Seymour Hersh broke the story and photos
of the massacre appeared in Life magazine, discrediting
the United States around the world. Americans, Time
observed, “must stand in the larger dock of guilt and
human  conscience.”  Although  high-ranking  officers
participated in the My Lai massacre and its cover-up,

only  one  soldier,  a  low-ranking  second  lieutenant
named William Calley, was convicted.

Believing that Calley had been made a fall guy for
official  U.S.  policies  that  inevitably  brought  death  to
innocent  civilians,  a  group  called  Vietnam  Veterans
Against the War publicized other atrocities committed
by U.S. troops. In a controversial protest in 1971, they
returned their combat medals at demonstrations out-
side  the  U.S.  Capitol,  literally  hurling  them  onto  the
Capitol steps. “Here’s my merit badge for murder,” one
vet  said.  Supporters  of  the  war  called  these  veterans
cowardly and un-American, but their heartfelt antiwar
protest  exposed  the  deep  personal  torment  that
Vietnam had caused many soldiers.

Détente  As protests continued at home, Nixon pur-
sued two strategies to achieve his declared “peace with
honor,” one diplomatic and the other brutal. First, he

