CHAPTER 28

  Uncivil Wars: Liberal Crisis and Conservative Rebirth, 1961–1972

929

sought  détente  (a  lessening  of  tensions)  with  the
Soviet  Union  and  a  new  openness  with  China.  In  a
series of meetings between 1970 and 1972, Nixon and
Soviet  premier  Leonid  Brezhnev  resolved  tensions
over  Cuba  and  Berlin  and  signed  the  first  Strategic
Arms Limita tion Treaty (SALT I), the latter a symbolic
step toward ending the Cold War arms race. Heavily
influenced  by  his  national  security  advisor,  the  Har-
vard  professor  Henry  Kissinger,  Nixon  believed  that
he  could  break  the  Cold  War  impasse  that  had  kept
the  United  States  from  productive  dialogue  with  the
Soviet Union.

Then, in 1972, Nixon visited China, becoming the
first sitting U.S. president to do so. In a televised week-
long  trip,  the  president  pledged  better  relations  with
China and declared that the two nations — one capital-
ist,  the  other  communist — could  peacefully  coexist.
This was the man who had risen to prominence in the
1950s  by  railing  against  the  Democrats  for  “losing”
China and by hounding communists and fellow travel-
ers. Indeed, the president’s impeccable anticommunist
credentials  gave  him  the  political  cover  to  travel  to
Beijing. He  remarked genially to Mao: “Those on the
right  can  do  what  those  on  the  left  only  talk  about.”
Praised  for  his  efforts  to  lessen  Cold  War  tensions,
Nixon also had tactical objectives in mind. He hoped
that by befriending both the Soviet Union and China,
he could play one against the other and strike a better
deal over Vietnam at the ongoing peace talks in Paris.
His second strategy, however, would prove less praise-
worthy and cost more lives.

Exit  America
In  April  1972,  in  an  attempt  to
strengthen  his  negotiating  position,  Nixon  ordered
B-52 bombing raids against North Vietnam. A month
later,  he  approved  the  mining  of  North  Vietnamese
ports, something Johnson had never dared to do. The
North Vietnamese were not isolated, however: supplies
from China and the Soviet Union continued, and the
Vietcong fought on.

With  the  1972  presidential  election  approaching,
Nixon  sent  Kissinger  back  to  the  Paris  peace  talks,
which had been initiated under Johnson. In a key con-
cession,  Kissinger  accepted  the  presence  of  North
Vietnamese troops in South Vietnam. North Vietnam
then  agreed  to  an  interim  arrangement  whereby  the
South Vietnamese government in Saigon would stay in
power  while  a  special  commission  arranged  a  final
settlement. With Kissinger’s announcement that “peace
is at hand,” Nixon got the election lift he wanted, but
the agreement was then sabotaged by General Nguyen
Van Thieu, the South Vietnamese president. So Nixon,

in one final spasm of bloodletting, unleashed the two-
week  “Christmas  bombing,”  the  most  intense  of  the
entire war. On January 27, 1973, the two sides signed
the Paris Peace Accords.

Nixon hoped that with massive U.S. aid, the Thieu
regime  might  survive.  But  Congress  was  in  revolt.  It
refused  appropriations  for  bombing  Cambodia  after
August 15, 1973, and gradually cut back aid to South
Vietnam.  In  March  1975,  North  Vietnamese  forces
launched  a  final  offensive,  and  on  April  30,  Vietnam
was  reunited.  Saigon,  the  South  Vietnamese  capital,
was  renamed  Ho  Chi  Minh  City,  after  the  founding
father of the communist regime.

The collapse of South Vietnam in 1975 produced a
powerful,  and  tragic,  historical  irony:  an  outcome
little  different  from  what  would  likely  have  resulted
from  the  unification  vote  in  1954  (Chapter  25).  In
other words, America’s most disastrous military adven-
ture of the twentieth century barely altered the geopo-
litical  realities  in  Southeast  Asia.  The  Hanoi  regime
called  itself  communist  but  never  intended  to  be  a
satellite  of  any  country,  least  of  all  China,  Vietnam’s
ancient enemy.

Many  paid  a  steep  price  for  the  Vietnam  War.
America’s Vietnamese friends lost jobs and property,
spent years in “reeducation” camps, or had to flee the
country. Millions of Vietnamese had died in a decade
of war, which included some of the most intensive aer-
ial  bombing  of  the  twentieth  century.  In  bordering
Cambodia,  the  maniacal  Khmer  Rouge,  followers  of
Cambodia’s  ruling  Communist  Party,  took  power
and  murdered  1.7  million  people  in  bloody  purges.
And in the United States, more than 58,000 Americans
had  sacrificed  their  lives,  and  300,000  had  been
wounded. On top of the war’s $150 billion price tag,
slow-to-heal internal wounds divided the country, and
Americans increasingly lost confidence in their politi-
cal leaders.

The Silent Majority Speaks Out
Nixon placed himself on the side of what he called “the
nonshouters,  the  nondemonstrators.”  But  moderate
and  conservative  Americans  increasingly  spoke  out.
They  were  not  in  the  mood  to  simply  remain  silent.
During Nixon’s first presidential term, those opposed
to  the  direction  liberalism  had  taken  since  the  early
1960s focused their discontent on what they believed
were the excesses of the “rights revolution” — the enor-
mous changes in American law and society initiated by
the civil rights movement and advanced by feminists
and others thereafter.

