930

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

The Fall of Saigon

After the 1973 U.S. withdrawal from Viet-
nam, the South Vietnamese government
lasted another two years. In March 1975,
the North Vietnamese forces launched a
ﬁnal offensive; by April, they had sur-
rounded the capital, Saigon. As seen
here, many Vietnamese, some of them
associated with the fallen South Viet na-
mese regime, sought sanctuary at the
U.S. embassy compound. Thousands of
Vietnamese and Americans were evacuated
before the last helicopter left the embassy
on April 30. Nik Wheeler/Sipa/AP/Wide World
Photos.

Law and Order and the Supreme Court  The rights
revolution  found  an  ally  in  an  unexpected  place:  the
U.S. Supreme Court. The decision that stood as a land-
mark in the civil rights movement, Brown v. Board of
Education (1954), triggered a larger judicial revolution.
Following Brown, the Court increasingly agreed to hear
human rights and civil liberties cases — as opposed to
its  previous  focus  on  property-related  suits.  Surpris-
ingly,  this  shift  was  led  by  the  man  whom  President
Dwight Eisenhower had appointed chief justice in 1953:
Earl Warren. A popular Republican governor of Cali-
fornia, Warren surprised many, including Eisenhower
himself,  with  his  robust  advocacy  of  civil  rights  and
civil liberties. The Warren Court lasted from 1954 until
1969  and  established  some  of  the  most  far-reaching
liberal jurisprudence in U.S. history.

Right-wing  activists  fiercely  opposed  the  Warren
Court,  which  they  accused  of  “legislating  from  the
bench”  and  contributing  to  social  breakdown.  They
pointed, for instance, to the Court’s rulings that people
who are arrested have a constitutional right to counsel

(1963,  1964)  and,  in  Miranda  v.  Arizona  (1966),  that
arrestees have to be informed by police of their right to
remain silent. Compounding conservatives’ frustration
was a series of decisions that liberalized restrictions on
pornography. Trying to walk the fine line between cen-
sorship and obscenity, the Court ruled in Roth v. United
States (1957) that obscene material had to be “utterly
without  redeeming  social  importance”  to  be  banned.
The  “social  importance”  test,  however,  proved  nearly
impossible to define and left wide latitude for pornog-
raphy to flourish.

That measure was finally abandoned in 1972, when
the Court ruled in Miller v. California that “contempo-
rary community standards” were the rightful measure
of obscenity. But Miller, too, had little effect on the por-
nographic magazines, films, and peep shows proliferat-
ing in the 1970s. Conservatives found these decisions
especially  distasteful,  since  the  Court  had  also  ruled
that  religious  ritual  of  any  kind  in  public  schools —
including prayers and Bible reading — violated the con-
stitutional  separation  of  church  and  state.  To  many

