CHAPTER 28

  Uncivil Wars: Liberal Crisis and Conservative Rebirth, 1961–1972

931

religious  Americans,  the  Court  had  taken  the  side  of
immorality over Christian values.

Supreme  Court  critics  blamed  rising  crime  rates
and  social  breakdown  on  the  Warren  Court’s  liberal
judicial record. Every category of crime was up in the
1970s, but especially disconcerting was the doubling of
the  murder  rate  since  the  1950s  and  the  76  percent
increase in burglary and theft between 1967 and 1976.
Sensational crimes had always grabbed headlines, but
now “crime” itself preoccupied politicians, the media,
and  the  public.  However,  no  one  could  establish  a
direct  causal  link  between  increases  in  crime  and
Supreme  Court  decisions,  given  a  myriad  of  other
social  factors,  including  drugs,  income  inequality,
enhanced  statistical  record-keeping,  and  the  prolif-
eration  of  guns.  But  when  many  Americans  looked
at  their  cities  in  the  1970s,  they  saw  pornographic
theaters,  X-rated  bookstores,  and  rising  crime  rates.
Where, they wondered, was law and order?

Busing  Another  major  civil  rights  objective —
desegregating schools — produced even more contro-
versy and fireworks. For fifteen years, southern states,
by a variety of stratagems, had fended off court direc-
tives that they desegregate “with all deliberate speed.”
In 1968, only about one-third of all black children in
the South attended schools with whites. At that point,
the  federal  courts  got  serious  and,  in  a  series  of  stiff
decisions, ordered an end to “dual school systems.”

Where  schools  remained  highly  segregated,  the
courts increasingly endorsed the strategy of busing stu-
dents to achieve integration. Plans differed across the
country. In some states, black children rode buses from
their  neighborhoods  to  attend  previously  all-white
schools. In others, white children were bused to black

or Latino neighborhoods. In an important 1971 deci-
sion, the Supreme Court upheld a countywide busing
plan  for  Charlotte-Mecklenburg,  a  North  Carolina
school district. Despite local opposition, desegregation
proceeded, and many cities in the South followed suit.
By the mid-1970s, 86 percent of southern black chil-
dren  were  attending  school  with  whites.  (In  recent
years, this trend has reversed.)

In the North, where segregated schooling was also
a  fact  of  life — arising  from  suburban  residential  pat-
terns — busing  orders  proved  less  effective.  Detroit
dramatized the problem. To integrate Detroit schools
would have required merging city and suburban school
districts. A lower court ordered just such a merger in
1971,  but  in  Milliken  v.  Bradley  (1974),  the  Supreme
Court  reversed  the  ruling,  requiring  busing  plans  to
remain  within  the  boundaries  of  a  single  school  dis-
trict.  Without  including  the  largely  white  suburbs  in
busing  efforts,  however,  achieving  racial  balance  in
Detroit,  and  other  major  northern  cities,  was  all  but
impossible. Postwar suburbanization had produced in
the  North  what  law  had  mandated  in  the  South:
entrenched racial segregation of schools.

As the 1972 election approached, President Nixon
took  advantage  of  rising  discontent  over  “law  and
order” and busing. He was the political beneficiary of a
growing reaction against liberalism that had begun to
take hold between 1968 and the early 1970s.

The 1972 Election
Political realignments have been infrequent in Ameri-
can  history.  One  occurred  between  1932  and  1936,
when  many  Republicans,  despairing  over  the  Great
Depression, had switched sides and voted for FDR. The

An Antibusing Confrontation in Boston

Where busing was implemented, it often faced
stiff resistance. Many white communities resented
judges dictating which children would attend which
neighborhood school. In working-class Irish South
Boston, mobs attacked African American students
bused in from Roxbury in 1974. A police presence
was required to keep South Boston High School
open. When lawyer and civil rights activist Ted
Landsmark tried to enter Boston’s city hall during
a 1976 antibusing demonstration, he was assaulted.
Stanley Forman’s Pulitzer Prize–winning photo for
the Boston Herald-American — titled The Soiling
of Old Glory — shows Joseph Rakes lunging
at Landsmark with an American ﬂag. Busing
also had the perverse effect of speeding up
“white ﬂight” to city suburbs. Pulitzer Prize, 1977,
www.stanleyformanphotos.com.

