932

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

4

3

7

4

4

4

6

9

6

3

45

3

4

43

14

4
8
17
3
10

41

27

11

13

11

21

26 13

25

6

9

11

8

12

7

9

17

3 Washington, D.C.

3

4

5

10

8

7

8

26

12

6

10

4

MAP 28.4
The Presidential Election of 1972

In one of the most lopsided presidential elections
of the twentieth century, Republican Richard Nixon
defeated Democrat George McGovern in a landslide
in 1972. It was a reversal of the 1964 election, just eight
years before, in which Republican Barry Goldwater had
been defeated by a similar margin. Nixon hoped that
his victory signaled what Kevin Phillips called “the
emerging Republican majority,” but the president’s
missteps and criminal actions in the Watergate scan-
dal would soon bring an end to his tenure in ofﬁce.

Candidate

Richard Nixon
(Republican)

George McGovern
(Democrat)

John Hospers
(Libertarian)

Electoral
Vote

Popular
Vote

Percent of
Popular Vote

520

47,169,911

60.7

17

29,170,383

37.5

1

3,674

0.0

years between 1968 and 1972 were another such piv-
otal moment. This time, Democrats were the ones who
abandoned their party.

After  the  1968  elections,  the  Democrats  fell  into
disarray. Bent on sweeping away the party’s old guard,
reformers took over, adopting new rules that granted
women,  African  Americans,  and  young  people  dele-
gate seats “in reasonable relation to their presence in
the  population.”  In  the  past,  an  alliance  of  urban
machines, labor unions, and white ethnic groups — the
heart of the New Deal coalition — dominated the nom-
inating process. But at the 1972 convention, few of the
party faithful qualified as delegates under the changed
rules. The crowning insult came when the convention
rejected  the  credentials  of  Chicago  mayor  Richard
Daley  and  his  delegation,  seating  instead  an  Illinois
delegation led by Jesse Jackson, a firebrand young black
minister and former aide to Martin Luther King Jr.

Capturing  the  party  was  one  thing;  beating  the
Repub licans  was  quite  another.  These  party  reforms
opened the door for George McGovern, a liberal South
Dakota senator and favorite of the antiwar and women’s
movements, to capture the nomination. But McGovern
took a number of missteps, including failing to mollify
key party backers such as the AFL-CIO, which, for the
first time in memory, refused to endorse the Democratic
ticket.  A  weak  campaigner,  McGovern  was  also  no
match for Nixon, who pulled out all the stops. Using

the  advantages  of  incumbency,  Nixon  gave  the  econ-
omy a well-timed lift and proclaimed (prematurely) a
cease-fire  in  Vietnam.  Nixon’s  appeal  to  the  “silent
majority” — people  who  “care  about  a  strong  United
States,  about  patriotism,  about  moral  and  spiritual
values” — was by now well honed.

Nixon won in a landslide, receiving nearly 61 per-
cent  of  the  popular  vote  and  carrying  every  state
except  Massachusetts  and  the  District  of  Columbia
(Map  28.4).  The  returns  revealed  how  fractured
traditional  Demo cratic  voting  blocs  had  become.
McGovern  received  only  38  percent  of  the  big-city
Catholic  vote  and  lost  42  percent  of  self-identified
Democrats  overall.  The  1972  election  marked  a  piv-
otal  moment  in  the  country’s  shift  to  the  right.  Yet
observers  legitimately  wondered  whether  the  1972
election results proved the popularity of conservatism
or merely showed that the country had grown weary
of  liberalism  and  the  changes  it  had  wrought  in
national life.

SUMMARY
In this chapter, we saw that the combined pressures of
the Vietnam War and racial and cultural conflict frac-
tured and split the New Deal coalition. Following John
Kennedy’s  assassination  in  1963,  Lyndon  Johnson

