CHAPTER 28

  CHAPTER REVIEW

933

advanced the most ambitious liberal reform program
since the New Deal, securing not only civil rights legis-
lation but also many programs in education, medical
care,  transportation,  environmental  protection,  and,
above all, his War on Poverty. But the Great Society fell
short  of  its  promise  as  Johnson  escalated  American
involvement in Vietnam.

The war bitterly divided Americans. Galvanized by
the  carnage  of  war  and  the  draft,  the  antiwar  move-
ment  spread  rapidly  among  young  people,  and  the
spirit of rebellion spilled beyond the war. The New Left
took the lead among college students, while the more
apolitical  counterculture  preached  liberation  through
sex, drugs, music, and personal transformation. Wom-
en’s liberationists broke from the New Left and raised
new  concerns  about  society’s  sexism.  Conservative

students rallied in support of the war and on behalf of
conservative principles, but they were often drowned
out by the more vocal and demonstrative liberals and
radicals.

In  1968,  the  nation  was  rocked  by  the  assassina-
tions of Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy,
as well as by a wave of urban riots, fueling a growing
popular desire for law and order. Adding to the national
disquiet was the Democratic National Convention that
summer, divided by the Vietnam War and besieged by
street riots outside. The stage was set for a new wave of
conservatism to take hold of the country, and a resur-
gence  of  the  Republican  Party  under  Richard  Nixon
between  1968  and  1972.  President  Nixon  ended  the
war  in  Vietnam,  but  only  after  five  more  years  and
many more casualties.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key People

Lyndon B. Johnson (p. 904)
Barry Goldwater (p. 905)
Betty Friedan (p. 908)
Ngo Dinh Diem (p. 910)
Robert Kennedy (p. 919)
Richard M. Nixon (p. 922)
George C. Wallace (p. 922)
Henry Kissinger (p. 929)

Key Concepts and Events

Great Society (p. 904)
Economic Opportunity Act

(p. 905)

Medicare (p. 906)
Medicaid (p. 906)
Equal Pay Act (p. 908)
The Feminine Mystique (p. 908)
Presidential Commission on the

Status of Women (p. 909)
National Organization for
Women (NOW) (p. 909)

Gulf of Tonkin Resolution (p. 911)
Operation Rolling Thunder

(p. 911)

Students for a Democratic
Society (SDS) (p. 914)

Port Huron Statement (p. 914)
New Left (p. 914)

Young Americans for Freedom

(YAF) (p. 915)

Sharon Statement (p. 918)
counterculture (p. 918)
Tet offensive (p. 919)
1968 Democratic National

Convention (p. 921)

Chicano Moratorium Committee

(p. 923)

women’s liberation (p. 924)
Title IX (p. 925)
Stonewall Inn (p. 926)
silent majority (p. 926)
Vietnamization (p. 927)
My Lai (p. 928)
détente (p. 929)
Warren Court (p. 930)

