934

PART 8

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  How  do  you  explain  the  liberal  resurgence  in  the

first half of the 1960s?

2.  What  were  the  main  elements  of  Johnson’s  Great

Society?

3.  How did the debates over civil liberties, particularly
with  respect  to  Supreme  Court  decisions  under
Chief Justice Earl Warren, influence political life in
the 1960s and 1970s?

4.  In what ways was the Vietnam War part of the Cold
War? How did the antiwar movement represent a
break with Cold War assumptions?

5.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Look  at  the
events listed under “America in the World” on the
thematic  timeline  on  page  803.  American  global
leadership is a major theme of Part 8. How did the
global role of the United States shift in the 1960s?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  In  what  ways
was  the  Great  Society  an  extension  of  the  New
Deal? In what ways was it different? What factors
made the period between 1932 and 1972 a “liberal”
era in American politics? What events and devel-
opments would you use to explain your answer?

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  Compare the photographs
of the prowar rally (p. 928) and the counterculture
(p. 918). Why did clothing and appearance become
so  important  to  many  social  movements  in  the
1960s — the  women’s  movement,  the  Black  Power
movement,  the  antiwar  movement,  and  others?
How are these visual images historical evidence?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Robert Dallek, Flawed Giant: Lyndon Johnson and
His Times, 1961–1973 (1998). An engaging biogra-
phy of Johnson and an account of his era.

Ruth Rosen, The World Split Open (2000). An acces-
sible exploration of the women’s movement and
feminism.

Maurice Isserman and Michael Kazin, America
Divided: The Civil War of the 1960s (1999). A
vivid account of dissent in the 1960s.

G. Calvin Mackenzie and Robert Weisbrot, The
Liberal Hour: Washington and the Politics of
Change in the 1960s (2008). A thoughtful
account of the Great Society.

Bruce Schulman, The Seventies: The Great Shift in
American Culture, Society, and Politics (2001). A
thoughtful explanation of Nixon and political
realignment.

Marilyn Young, The Vietnam Wars, 1945–1990 (1991).
An excellent history of the decades-long conflict in
Vietnam.

