The Search for Order
in an Era of Limits
1973–1980

Early in 1971, a new ﬁctional charac-

ter appeared on national television.
Archie  Bunker  was  a  gruff  blue-
collar  worker  who  berated  his  wife  and
bemoaned  his  daughter’s  marriage  to  a
bearded  hippie.  Prone  to  bigoted  and
insensitive  remarks,  Archie  and  his  wife
Edith sang “Those Were the Days” at the
opening  of  each  episode  of  All  in  the
Family, a half-hour comedy. The song celebrated a bygone era, when “girls were girls
and men were men.” Disdainful of the liberal social movements of the 1960s, Archie
professed a conservative, hardscrabble view of the world.

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
How  did  the
legacy  of  social
changes — such  as  shifting  gender
roles,  civil  rights,  and  challenges  to
the  family — in  the  1960s  continue
to  reverberate  in  the  1970s,  lead-
ing  to  both  new  opportunities  and
political disagreement?

Archie Bunker became a folk hero to many conservative Americans in the 1970s; he
said what they felt. But his signiﬁcance went beyond his politics. All in the Family gave
voice to a national search for order. His feminist daughter, liberal son-in-law, and black
neighbors  brought  that  changing  world  into  Archie’s  modest  home  in  Queens,  New
York.  Not  all  Americans  were  as  resistant  to  change  as  Archie.  Most  were  ordinary,
middle-of-the-road people confronting the aftermath of the tumultuous late 1960s and
early 1970s. The liberalism of those years challenged Americans to think in new ways
about race, gender roles, sexual morality, and the family. Vietnam and the Watergate
scandal had compounded matters by producing a crisis of political authority. An “old
order” had seemingly collapsed. But what would take its place was not yet clear.

Alongside cultural dislocation and political alienation, the country confronted eco-
nomic setbacks. In 1973, inﬂation began to climb at a pace unprecedented in the post–
World War II decades, and economic growth slowed. An energy crisis, aggravated by
U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East, produced fuel shortages. Foreign competition in
manufacturing  brought  less  expensive,  and  often  more  reliable,  goods  into  the  U.S.
market  from  nations  such  as  Japan  and  West  Germany.  As  a  result,  more  American
plants closed. The great economic ride enjoyed by the United States since World War II
was over.

What distinguishes the period between the energy crisis (1973) and the election of
Ronald Reagan to the presidency (1980) is the collective national search for order in the
midst of economic crisis, political realignment, and rapid social change. Virtually all the
verities  and  touchstones  of  the  postwar  decades — Cold  War  liberalism,  rising  living
standards, and the nuclear family — had come under question, and most agreed on the
urgency to act. For some, this search demanded new forms of liberal experimentation.
For others, it led instead to the conservatism of the emerging New Right.

29

C H A P T E R

AN ERA OF LIMITS

Energy Crisis

Environmentalism

Economic Transformation

Urban Crisis and Suburban

Revolt

POLITICS IN FLUX,
1973–1980

Watergate and the Fall

of a President

Jimmy Carter: The Outsider

as President

REFORM AND REACTION
IN THE 1970S

Civil Rights in a New Era

The Women’s Movement and

Gay Rights

After the Warren Court

THE AMERICAN FAMILY
ON TRIAL

Working Families in the Age
of Deindustrialization

Navigating the Sexual

Revolution

Religion in the 1970s: The
Fourth Great Awakening

936

