938

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

An Era of Limits
The  economic  downturn  of  the  early  1970s  was
the  deepest  slump  since  the  Great  Depression.  Every
major economic indicator — employment, productivity,
growth — turned  negative,  and  by  1973  the  economy
was in a tailspin. Inflation, brought on in part by mili-
tary spending in Vietnam, proved especially difficult to
control. When a Middle East embargo cut oil supplies
in  1973,  prices  climbed  even  more.  Unemployment
remained high and productivity growth low until 1982.
Overall,  the  1970s  represented  the  worst  economic
decade of the postwar period — what California gover-
nor Jerry Brown called an “era of limits.” In this time of
distress, Americans were forced to consider other lim-
its  to  the  growth  and  expansion  that  had  long  been
markers of national progress. The environmental move-
ment brought attention to the toxic effects of modern
industrial capitalism on the natural world. As the urban
crisis grew worse, several major cities verged on bank-
ruptcy.  Finally,  political  limits  were  reached  as  well:
None of the presidents of the 1970s could reverse the
nation’s economic slide, though each spent years trying.

Energy Crisis
Modern economies run on oil. If the oil supply is dras-
tically reduced, woe follows. Something like that hap-
pened  to  the  United  States  in  the  1970s.  Once  the

world’s  leading  oil  producer,  the  United  States  had
become  heavily  dependent  on  inexpensive  imported
oil, mostly from the Persian Gulf (Figure 29.1). Ameri-
can and European oil companies had discovered and
developed the Middle Eastern fields early in the twen-
tieth century, when much of the region was ruled by
the British and French empires. When Middle Eastern
states threw off the remnants of European colonialism,
they  demanded  concessions  for  access  to  the  fields.
Foreign  companies  still  extracted  the  oil,  but  now
they did so under profit-sharing agreements with the
Persian  Gulf  states.  In  1960,  these  nations  and  other
oil-rich developing countries formed a cartel (a busi-
ness  association  formed  to  control  prices),  the  Orga-
nization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC).

Conflict between Israel and the neighboring Arab
states of Egypt, Syria, and Jordan prompted OPEC to
take political sides between 1967 and 1973. Following
Israel’s  victory  in  the  1967  Six-Day  War,  Israeli-Arab
tensions in the region grew closer to boiling over with
each passing year. In the 1973 Yom Kippur War, Egypt
and Syria invaded Israel to regain territory lost in the
1967 conflict. Israel prevailed, but only after being resup-
plied by an emergency American airlift. In response to
U.S.  support  for  Israel,  the  Arab  states  in  OPEC
declared an oil embargo in October 1973. Gas prices in
the  United  States  quickly  jumped  by  40  percent  and
heating  oil  prices  by  30  percent.  Demand  outpaced
supply,  and  Americans  found  themselves  parked  for

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

u
t
B
n
o
i
l
l
i
r
d
a
u
Q

0
1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Fuel wood
Hydroelectric
Nuclear

Coal
Oil
Natural gas

FIGURE 29.1
U.S. Energy Consumption,
1900–2000

Coal was the nation’s primary
source of energy until the 1950s,
when it was surpassed by oil and
natural gas. The revival of coal
consumption after 1960 stemmed
from new open-pit mining in the
West that provided cheaper fuel
for power plants. The decline in
oil consumption in 1980 reﬂects
the nation’s response to the oil
crisis of the 1970s, including, most
notably, fuel-efﬁcient automo-
biles. Nuclear energy became
an important new fuel source,
but after 1990 its contribution
leveled off as a result of the
safety concerns triggered by
the Three Mile Island incident.

