CHAPTER 29

  The Search for Order in an Era of Limits, 1973–1980

939

hours in mile-long lines at gasoline stations for much
of the winter of 1973–1974. Oil had become a political
weapon, and the West’s vulnerability stood revealed.

The  United  States  scrambled  to  meet  its  energy
needs in the face of the oil shortage. Just two months
after  the  OPEC  embargo  began, Congress  imposed  a
national speed limit of 55 miles per hour to conserve
fuel.  Americans  began  to  buy  smaller,  more  fuel-
efficient cars such as Volkswagens, Toyotas, and Dat-
suns (later Nissans) — while sales of Detroit-made cars
(now nicknamed “gas guzzlers”) slumped. With one of
every six jobs in the country generated directly or indi-
rectly  by  the  auto  industry,  the  effects  rippled  across
the economy. Compounding the distress was the rag-
ing inflation set off by the oil shortage; prices of basic
necessities,  such  as  bread,  milk,  and  canned  goods,
rose by nearly 20 percent in 1974 alone. “things will
get worse,” one newspaper headline warned, “before
they get worse.”

Environmentalism
The  energy  crisis drove home the realization that the
earth’s  resources  are  not  limitless.  Such  a  notion  was
also at the heart of the era’s revival of environmental-
ism. The environmental movement was an offshoot of
sixties activism, but it had numerous historical prece-
dents: the preservationist, conservationist, and wilder-
ness  movements  of  the  late  nineteenth  century;  the
conservationist  ethos  of  the  New  Deal;  and  anxiety
about  nuclear  weapons  and  overpopulation  in  the
1940s.  Three  of  the  nation’s  leading  environmental
organizations — the Sierra Club, the Wilderness Society,
and  the  Natural  Resources  Council — were  founded
in  1892,  1935,  and  1942,  respectively.  Environ mental
activists in the 1970s extended the movement’s histori-
cal roots through renewed efforts to ensure a healthy
environment and access to unspoiled nature (Thinking
Like a Historian, p. 940).

The movement had received a hefty boost back in
1962  when  biologist  Rachel  Carson  published  Silent
Spring, a stunning analysis of the pesticide DDT’s toxic
impact on the human and natural food chains. A suc-
cession of galvanizing developments followed in the late
1960s. The Sierra Club successfully fought two dams in
1966 that would have flooded the Grand Canyon. And
in 1969, three major events spurred the movement: an
offshore drilling rig spilled millions of gallons of oil off
the  coast  of  Santa  Barbara;  the  Cuyahoga  River  near
Cleveland burst into flames because of the accumula-
tion of flammable chemicals on its surface; and Friends
of  the  Everglades  opposed  an  airport  that  threatened

Earth Day, 1970

No single event better encapsulated the growing environ-
mental awareness of Americans than the nationwide
celebration of the ﬁrst Earth Day on April 22, 1970. In
this photograph, college students in California release
a balloon as part of that day’s activities. Julian Wasser/
Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images.

plants and wildlife in Florida. With these events serv-
ing as catalysts, environmentalism became a certifiable
mass movement on the first Earth Day, April 22, 1970,
when  20  million  citizens  gathered  in  communities
across the country to express their support for a cleaner,
healthier planet.

Environmental  Protection  Agency  Earlier  that
year, on the heels of the Santa Barbara oil spill, Congress
passed the National Environmental Policy Act, which
created the Environmental Protec tion Agency (EPA). A
bipartisan  bill  with  broad  sup-
port,  including  that  of  President
Nixon, the law required develop-
ers  to  file  environmental  impact
statements  assessing  the  effect  of
their  projects  on  ecosystems.  A

IDENTIFY CAUSES
What major factors led to
the birth of the environ-
mental movement in the
1970s?

