T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

The Environmental

Movement: Reimagining

the Human-Earth

Relationship

The  1970s  witnessed  the  emergence  of  the  environmental  movement  in  the
United  States.  Environmentalism  took  a  variety  of  forms  and  initially  was
embraced by politicians across the political spectrum, including Republican pres-
ident Richard Nixon, who signed the National Environmental Policy Act in 1970.
Yet environmentalism also proved to be politically divisive. The following docu-
ments provide a range of perspectives on an important social and political move-
ment discussed in this chapter.

1.  Rachel Carson, Silent Spring, 1962.

For the first time in the history of the world, every human
being is now subjected to contact with dangerous chemi-
cals, from the moment of conception until death. In the
less than two decades of their use, synthetic pesticides
have been so thoroughly distributed throughout the
animate and inanimate world that they occur virtually
everywhere. They have been recovered from most of
the major river systems and even from streams of
groundwater flowing unseen through the earth.

2.  Ralph Nader, foreword to Ecotactics: The Sierra

Club Handbook for Environmental Activists, 1970.
In the Sierra Club’s guide to environmental activ-
ism, environmental and consumer rights activist
Nader discusses “environmental violence.”

Pollution is violence and environmental pollution is
environmental violence. It is a violence that has different
impacts, styles and time factors than the more primitive
kinds of violence such as crime in the streets. Yet in the
size of the population exposed and the seriousness of
the harm done, environmental violence far exceeds
that of street crime. . . .

To deal with a system of oppression and suppression,

which characterizes the environmental violence in this
country, the first priority is to deprive the polluters of
their unfounded legitimacy.

3.  President Richard Nixon, State of the Union

Address, January 22, 1970.

I shall propose to this Congress a $10 billion nationwide
clean waters program to put modern municipal waste
treatment plants in every place in America where they
are needed to make our waters clean again, and do it
now. . . .

As our cities and suburbs relentlessly expand [. . .]
priceless open spaces needed for recreation areas acces-
sible to their people are swallowed up — often forever.
Unless we preserve these spaces while they are available,

940

we will have none to preserve. Therefore, I shall propose
new financing methods for purchasing open space and
parklands now, before they are lost to us.

The automobile is our worst polluter of the air. Ade-
quate control requires further advances in engine design
and fuel composition. We shall intensify our research, set
increasingly strict standards, and strengthen enforcement
procedures — and we shall do it now.

We can no longer afford to consider air and water
common property, free to be abused by anyone without
regard to the consequences. Instead, we should begin
now to treat them as scarce resources, which we are no
more free to contaminate than we are free to throw gar-
bage into our neighbor’s yard.

4.  “Earthrise” over the moon’s surface, December 24,
1968. Photo taken by Apollo 8 crewmember Bill
Anders, as the Apollo spacecraft orbited the moon.

NASA.

