5.  Paul Ehrlich, The Population Bomb, 1969. A best-
selling book that warned of a coming global
overpopulation straining the world’s resources.

Nothing could be more misleading to our children than
our present affluent society. They will inherit a totally dif-
ferent world, a world in which the standards, politics, and
economics of the 1960s are dead. As the most powerful
nation in the world today, and its largest consumer, the
United States cannot stand isolated. We are today involved
in the events leading to famine; tomorrow we may be
destroyed by its consequences.

Our position requires that we take immediate action at

home and promote effective action world-wide. We must
have population control at home, hopefully through a
system of incentives and penalties, but by compulsion
if voluntary methods fail. We must use our political
power to push other countries into programs which
combine agricultural development and population
control. And while this is being done we must take
action to reverse the deterioration of our environ-
ment before population pressure permanently ruins
our planet.

6.  President Ronald Reagan, speech at the Republican

National Convention, July 17, 1980.

Make no mistake. We will not permit the safety of our
people or our environmental heritage to be jeopardized,
but we are going to reaffirm that the economic prosperity
of our people is a fundamental part of our environment.
Our problems are both acute and chronic, yet all we
hear from those in positions of leadership are the same
tired proposals for more government tinkering, more
meddling, and more control — all of which led us to
this state in the first place.

7.  “Waste Produced by a Typical Family in a Year.”

© Martyn Goddard/Corbis.

Sources: (1) Rachel Carson, Silent Spring (New York: Mariner Books, 2002), 15;
(2) John G. Mitchell and Constance L. Hastings, eds., Ecotactics: The Sierra Club
Hand book for Environmental Activists (New York: Trident Press, 1970), 13–15;
(3 & 6) Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley, The American Presidency Project,
presidency.ucsb.edu; (5) Louis Warren, ed., American Environmental History
(Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2003), 296.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Compare sources 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7. What are the differ-

ent ways the environmental threat was understood and
characterized? What kinds of solutions were proposed?
2.  Source 4 is one of the ﬁrst ever photographs of the earth
taken from space. How would this visual perspective
encourage viewers to think of the earth’s resources as
ﬁnite?

3.  How does source 6 help us understand the opposition
that developed to environmentalism? Why did some
Americans oppose the environmental movement?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Using what you have learned about the environmental
movement in this chapter and the documents above,
construct an essay in which you make a historical argument
about the origins of the movement, the issues that it raised,
and the opposition that developed. How did the movement
shape politics in the 1970s?

941

