942

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

spate of new laws followed: the Clean Air Act (1970),
the  Occupational  Health  and  Safety  Act  (1970),  the
Water  Pollution  Control  Act  (1972),  and  the  Endan-
gered Species Act (1973).

The  Democratic  majority  in  Congress  and  the
Republican president generally found common ground
on  these  issues,  and  Time  magazine  wondered  if  the
environment was “the gut issue that can unify a polar-
ized nation.” Despite the broad popularity of the move-
ment,  however,  Time’s  prediction  was  not  borne  out.
Corporations  opposed  environmental  regulations,  as
did many of their workers, who believed that tightened
standards  threatened  their  jobs.  “if  you’re  hungry
and out of work, eat an environmentalist,” read
one labor union bumper sticker. By the 1980s, environ-
mentalism  starkly  divided  Americans,  with  propo-
nents of unfettered economic growth on one side and
environmental activists preaching limits on the other.

Nuclear  Power  An  early  foreshadowing  of  those
divisions came in the brewing controversy over nuclear
power. Electricity from the atom — what could be bet-
ter? That was how Americans had greeted the arrival of
power-generating nuclear technology in the 1950s. By
1974, U.S. utility companies were operating forty-two
nuclear  power  plants,  with  a  hundred  more  planned.
Given the oil crisis, nuclear energy might have seemed
a  godsend;  unlike  coal-  or  oil-driven  plants,  nuclear
operations produced no air pollutants.

Environmentalists,  however,  publicized  the  dan-
gers of nuclear power plants: a reactor meltdown would
be  catastrophic,  and  so,  in  slow  motion,  would  the
dumping of the radioactive waste, which would gener-
ate toxic levels of radioactivity for hundreds of years.
These  fears  seemed  to  be  confirmed  in  March  1979,
when the reactor core at the Three Mile Island nuclear
plant  near  Harrisburg,  Pennsylvania,  came  close  to
meltdown. More than 100,000 people fled their homes.
A prompt shutdown saved the plant, but the near catas-
trophe  enabled  environmentalists  to  win  the  battle
over nuclear energy. After the incident at Three Mile
Island, no new nuclear plants were authorized, though
a handful with existing authorization were built in the
1980s. Today, nuclear reactors account for 20 percent
of  all  U.S.  power  generation — substantially  less  than
several European nations, but still fourth in the world.

for a growing federal deficit and spiraling inflation. In
the  industrial  sector,  the  country  faced  more  robust
competition from West Germany and Japan. America’s
share of world trade dropped from 32 percent in 1955
to 18 percent in 1970 and was headed downward. As a
result,  in  a  blow  to  national  pride,  nine  Western
European countries had surpassed the United States in
per capita gross domestic product (GDP) by 1980.

Many  of  these  economic  woes  highlighted  a
broader, multigenerational transformation in the United
States: from an industrial-manufacturing economy to a
postindustrial-service one. That transformation, which
continues  to  this  day,  meant  that  the  United  States
began  to  produce fewer  automobiles,  appliances,  and
televisions  and  more  financial  services,  health-care
services, and management consulting services — not to
mention many millions of low-paying jobs in the res-
taurant, retail, and tourist industries.

In the 1970s, the U.S. economy was hit simultane-
ously by unemployment, stagnant consumer demand,
and  inflation — a  combination  called  stagflation —
which contradicted a basic principle taught by econo-
mists:  prices  were  not  supposed  to  rise  in  a  stagnant
economy (Figure 29.2). For ordinary Americans, stag-
flation meant a noticeable decline in purchasing power,
as  discretionary  income  per  worker  dropped  18  per-
cent between 1973 and 1982. None of the three presi-
dents of the decade — Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, and
Jimmy  Carter — had  much  luck  tackling  stagflation.
Nixon’s  New  Economic  Policy  was  perhaps  the  most
radical  attempt.  Nixon  imposed  temporary  price  and
wage  controls  in  1971  in  an  effort  to  curb  inflation.
Then he took an even bolder step: removing the United
States from the gold standard, which allowed the dollar
to  float  in  international  currency  markets  and  effec-
tively  ended  the  Bretton  Woods  monetary  system
established after World War II.

The  underlying  weaknesses  in  the  U.S.  economy
remained,  however.  Ford,  too,  had  little  success.  His
Whip Inflation Now (WIN) campaign urged Americans
to cut food waste and do more with less, a noble but
deeply  unpopular  idea  among  the  American  public.
Carter’s policies, considered in a subsequent section of
this  chapter,  were  similarly  ineffective.  The  fruitless
search  for  a  new  economic  order  was  a  hallmark  of
1970s politics.

Economic Transformation
In addition to the energy crisis, the economy was beset
by a host of longer-term problems. Government spend-
ing on the Vietnam War and the Great Society made

Deindustrialization  America’s economic woes struck
hardest  at  the  industrial  sector,  which  suddenly —
shockingly — began  to  be  dismantled.  Worst  hit  was
the  steel  industry,  which  for  seventy-five  years  had
been the economy’s crown jewel. Unscathed by World

