CHAPTER 29

  The Search for Order in an Era of Limits, 1973–1980

943

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

0
1960 ’62

’64

’66

’68

’70

’72

’74

’76

’78

’80

’82

’84

’86

’88

’90

’92

’94

’96

’98

2000

FIGURE 29.2
The Inflation Rate, 1960–2000

The impact of the oil crisis of 1973 on the inﬂation rate appears all too graphically in this ﬁg-
ure. The dip in 1974 reﬂects the sharp recession that began that year, after which the inﬂation
rate zoomed up to a staggering 14 percent in 1980. The return to normal levels after 1980
stemmed from very harsh measures by the Federal Reserve Board, which, while they suc-
ceeded, came at the cost of a painful slowdown in the economy.

War  II,  U.S.  steel  producers  had  enjoyed  an  open,
hugely profitable market. But lack of serious competi-
tion  left  them  without  incentives  to  replace  outdated
plants and equipment. When West Germany and Japan
rebuilt  their  steel  industries,  these  facilities  incorpo-
rated the latest technology. Foreign steel flooded into
the United States during the 1970s, and the American
industry  was  simply  overwhelmed.  Formerly  titanic
steel companies began a massive dismantling; virtually
the  entire  Pittsburgh  region,  once  a  national  hub  of
steel  production,  lost  its  heavy  industry  in  a  single
generation.  By  the  mid-1980s,  downsizing,  automa-
tion,  and  investment  in  new  technologies  made  the
American steel industry competitive again — but it was

Deindustrialization

Increasing economic competition from overseas created hard
times for American industry in the 1970s and 1980s. Many
of the nation’s once-proud core industries, such as steel,
declined precipitously in these decades. This photo shows a
steel mill in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, being demolished in
1982. Once the center of American steel production, Pitts-
burgh suffered hard times in the 1970s and 1980s. The result
of such closures was the creation of the so-called Rust Belt in
the Northeast and Midwest (Map 29.1). Lynn Johnson/National
Geographic/Getty Images.

