944

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What major developments
shaped the American
economy in the 1970s and
contributed to its transfor-
mation?

a shadow of its former self, and it
continues to struggle to this day.

The  steel  industry  was  the
prime  example  of  what  became
known  as  deindustrialization.
The country was in the throes of
an economic transformation that
left it largely stripped of its indus-
trial  base.  Steel  was  hardly  alone.  A  swath  of  the
Northeast  and  Midwest,  the  country’s  manufacturing
heartland,  became  the  nation’s  Rust  Belt  (Map  29.1),
strewn with abandoned plants and distressed commu-
nities.  The  automobile,  tire,  textile,  and  other  con-
sumer  durable  industries  (appliances,  electronics,
furniture,  and  the  like)  all  started  shrinking  in  the

1970s. In 1980, Business Week  bemoaned “plant clos-
ings across the continent” and called for the “reindus-
trialization of America.”

Organized  Labor  in  Decline  Deindustrialization
threw many tens of thousands of blue-collar workers
out of well-paid union jobs. One study followed 4,100
steelworkers left jobless by the 1977 shutdown of the
Campbell Works of the Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co.
Two years later, 35 percent had retired early at half pay;
10  percent  had  moved;  15  percent  were  still  jobless,
with  unemployment  benefits  long  gone;  and  40  per-
cent had found local work, but mostly in low-paying,
service-sector jobs. In another instance, between 1978
and  1981,  eight  Los  Angeles  companies — including

C A N A D A

WASH.

OREGON

IDAHO

MONTANA

WYOMING

MINN.

NORTH
DAKOTA

SOUTH
DAKOTA

NEBRASKA

IOWA

NEVADA

UTAH

CALIF.

COLORADO

KANSAS

MO.

ARIZONA

NEW
MEXICO

OKLAHOMA

TEXAS

ARK.

LA.

VT.

MAINE

N.H.

MASS.

R.I.

CONN.

N.J.

DEL.
MD.

N

W

E

S

A TLA NTIC
OCE AN

WIS.

MICH.

NEW
YORK

ILL.

IND.

OHIO

W.
VA.

KY.

TENN.

MISS. ALA.

GA.

PA.

VA.

N.C.

S.C.

FLA.

PACIFIC
OCEAN

Population Growth
1940–2000
Over 200 percent
101–200 percent
51–100 percent
26–50 percent
25 percent or less

M E X I C O

Gulf of Mexico

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

MAP 29.1
From Rust Belt to Sunbelt, 1940–2000

One of the most signiﬁcant developments of the post–World War II era was the growth of the
Sunbelt. Sparked by federal spending for military bases, the defense industry, and the space
program, states of the South and Southwest experienced an economic boom in the 1950s. This
growth was further enhanced in the 1970s, as the heavily industrialized regions of the Northeast
and Midwest declined and migrants from what was quickly dubbed the Rust Belt headed to the
South and West in search of jobs.

