CHAPTER 29

  The Search for Order in an Era of Limits, 1973–1980

945

such giants as Ford, Uniroyal, and U.S. Steel — closed
factories  employing  18,000  workers.  These  Ohio  and
California workers, like hundreds of thousands of their
counterparts  across  the  nation,  had  fallen  from  their
perch in the middle class (America Compared, p. 946).
Deindustrialization dealt an especially harsh blow
to the labor movement, which had facilitated the post-
war expansion of that middle class. In the early 1970s,
as inflation hit, the number of strikes surged; 2.4 mil-
lion  workers  participated  in  work  stoppages  in  1970
alone. However, industry argued that it could no lon-
ger  afford  union  demands,  and  labor’s  bargaining
power  produced  fewer  and  fewer  concrete  results.  In
these hard years, the much-vaunted labor-management
accord of the 1950s, which raised profits and wages by
passing  costs  on  to  consumers,  went  bust.  Instead  of
seeking  higher  wages,  unions  now  mainly  fought  to
save jobs. Union membership went into steep decline,
and by the mid-1980s organized labor represented less
than 18 percent of American workers, the lowest level
since  the  1920s.  The  impact  on  liberal  politics  was
huge. With labor’s decline, a main buttress of the New
Deal coalition was coming undone.

Urban Crisis and Suburban Revolt
The  economic  downturn  pushed  already  struggling
American cities to the brink of fiscal collapse. Middle-
class  flight  to  the  suburbs  continued  apace,  and  the

“urban crisis” of the 1960s spilled into the “era of lim-
its.” Facing huge price inflation and mounting piles of
debt — to  finance  social  services  for  the  poor  and
to  replace  disappearing  tax  revenue — nearly  every
major  American  city  struggled  to  pay  its  bills  in  the
1970s.  Surrounded  by  prosperous  postwar  suburbs,
central cities seemingly could not catch a break.

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
How did cities and suburbs
experience the “era of lim-
its” differently, and why?

New  York,  the  nation’s  financial  capital  and  its
largest  city,  fared  the  worst.  Its  annual  budget  was
in  the  billions,  larger  than  that
of most states. Unable to borrow
on  the  tightening  international
bond  market,  New  York  neared
collapse  in  the  summer  of  1975;
bankruptcy was a real possibility.
When  Mayor  Abraham  Beame
appealed  to  the  federal  government  for  assistance,
President Ford refused. “Ford to City: Drop Dead” read
the headline in the New York Daily News. Fresh appeals
ultimately produced a solution: the federal government
would lend New York money, and banks would declare
a  three-year  moratorium  on  municipal  debt.  The
arrangement  saved  the  city  from  defaulting,  but  the
mayor was forced to cut city services, freeze wages, and
lay off workers. One pessimistic observer declared that
“the  banks  have  been  saved,  and  the  city  has  been
condemned.”

Cities  faced  declining  fortunes  in  these  years  for
many reasons, but one key was the continued loss of

“Ford to City: Drop Dead”

In the summer of 1975, New York City nearly went
bankrupt. When Mayor Abraham Beame appealed to
President Gerald Ford for assistance, these newspaper
headlines captured the chief executive’s response.
Though it was ultimately saved from ﬁnancial ruin,
the city’s brush with insolvency symbolized the
larger problems facing the nation: economic stag-
nation, high inﬂation, and unemployment. Hard
times had seemingly spared no one. AP Images.

