CHAPTER 29

  The Search for Order in an Era of Limits, 1973–1980

947

estate values upward, and property taxes skyrocketed.
Hardest  hit  were  suburban  property  owners,  along
with  retirees  and  others  on  fixed  incomes,  who  sud-
denly faced unaffordable tax bills. Into this dire situa-
tion stepped Howard Jarvis, a conservative anti–New
Dealer  and  a  genius  at  mobilizing  grassroots  discon-
tent. In 1978, Jarvis proposed Proposition 13, an initia-
tive  that  would  roll  back  property  taxes,  cap  future
increases  for  present  owners,  and  require  that  all  tax
measures have a two-thirds majority in the legislature.
Despite opposition by virtually the entire state leader-
ship, including politicians from both parties, Californ-
ians voted overwhelmingly for Jarvis’s measure.

Proposition  13  hobbled  public  spending  in  the
nation’s  most  populous  state.  Per  capita  funding  of
California public schools, once the envy of the nation,
plunged  from  the  top  tier  to  the  bottom,  where  it
was second only to Mississippi. Moreover, Proposition
13’s  complicated  formula  benefitted  middle-class  and
wealthy home owners at the expense of less-well-off cit-
izens, especially those who depended heavily on public
services. Businesses, too, came out ahead, because com-
mercial property got the same protection as residential
property.  More  broadly,  Proposition  13  inspired  tax
revolts  across  the  country  and  helped  conservatives
define an enduring issue: low taxes.

In addition to public investment, another cardinal
marker of New Deal and Great Society liberalism had
been a remarkable decline in income inequality. In the
1970s, that trend reversed, and the wealthiest Ameri-
cans,  those  among  the  top  10  percent,  began  to  pull
ahead  again.  As  corporations  restructured  to  boost
profits during the 1970s slump, they increasingly laid
off  high-wage  workers,  paid  the  remaining  workers
less, and relocated overseas. Thus upper-class Ameri-
cans  benefitted,  while  blue-collar  families  who  had
been  lifted  into  the  middle  class  during  the  postwar
boom  increasingly  lost  out.  An  unmistakable  trend
was apparent by the end of the 1970s. The U.S. labor
market was dividing in two: a vast, low-wage market at
the bottom and a much narrower high-wage market at
the top, with the middle squeezed smaller and smaller.

Politics in Flux, 1973–1980
A  search  for  order  characterized  national  politics  in
the 1970s as well. It began with a scandal. Misbehav-
ior  is  endemic  to  politics.  Yet  what  became  known
as  the  Watergate  affair — or  simply  Watergate —
implicated President Richard Nixon in illegal behavior
severe enough to bring down his presidency. Liberals

benefitted from Nixon’s fall in the short term, but their
long-term retreat continued. Politics remained in flux
because while liberals were on the defensive, conserva-
tives had not yet put forth a clear alternative.

Watergate and the Fall of a President
On  June  17,  1972,  something  strange  happened  at
Washington’s  Watergate  office/apartment/hotel  com-
plex.  Early  that  morning,  five  men  carrying  wiretap-
ping equipment were apprehended there attempting to
break into the headquarters of the Democratic National
Committee  (DNC).  Queried  by  the  press,  a  White
House  spokesman  dismissed  the  episode  as  “a  third-
rate burglary attempt.” Pressed further, Nixon himself
denied  any  White  House  involvement  in  “this  very
bizarre incident.” In fact, the two masterminds of the
break-in, G. Gordon Liddy and E. Howard Hunt, were
former  FBI  and  CIA  agents  currently  working  for
Nixon’s Committee to Re-elect the President (CREEP).
The Watergate burglary was no isolated incident. It
was  part  of  a  broad  pattern  of  abuse  of  power  by  a
White  House  obsessed  with  its  enemies.  Liddy  and
Hunt were on the White House payroll, part of a clan-
destine squad hired to stop leaks to the press. But they
were  soon  arranging  illegal  wiretaps  at  DNC  head-
quarters, part of a campaign of “dirty tricks” against the
Democrats.  Nixon’s  siege  mentality  best  explains  his
fatal misstep. He could have dissociated himself from
the break-in by firing his guilty aides or even just by let-
ting justice take its course. But it was election time, and
Nixon did not trust his political future to such a strat-
egy. Instead, he arranged hush money for the burglars
and  instructed  the  CIA  to  stop  an  FBI  investigation
into the affair. This was obstruction of justice, a crimi-
nal offense.

Nixon kept the lid on until after the election, but in
early 1973, one of the Watergate burglars began to talk.
In the meantime, two reporters at the Washington Post,
Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward, uncovered CREEP’s
links to key White House aides. In May 1973, a Senate
investigating committee began holding nationally tele-
vised hearings, at which administration officials impli-
cated Nixon in the illegal cover-up. The president kept
investigators  at  bay  for  a  year,  but  in  June  1974,  the
House Judiciary Committee began to consider articles
of  impeachment.  Certain  of  being  convicted  by  the
Senate,  Nixon  became,  on  August  9,  1974,  the  first
U.S.  president  to  resign  his  office. The  next  day,  Vice
President Gerald Ford was sworn in as president. Ford,
the Republican minority leader in the House of Rep-
resentatives, had replaced Vice President Spiro Agnew,

