948

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

who had himself resigned in 1973 for accepting kick-
backs while governor of Maryland. A month after he
took office, Ford stunned the nation by granting Nixon
a “full, free, and absolute” pardon.

Congress  pushed  back,  passing  a  raft  of  laws
against  the  abuses  of  the  Nixon  administration:  the
War  Powers  Act  (1973),  which  reined  in  the  presi-
dent’s  ability  to  deploy  U.S.  forces  without  congres-
the
sional  approval;  amendments  strengthening
Freedom  of  Informa tion  Act (1974), which gave citi-
zens access to federal records; the Ethics in Government
Act (1978); and the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Act  (1978),  which  prohibited  domestic  wiretapping
without a warrant.

Popular disdain for politicians, evident in declining
voter  turnout,  deepened  with  Nixon’s  resignation  in
1974. “Don’t vote,” read one bumper sticker in 1976. “It
only  encourages  them.”  Watergate  not  only  damaged
short-term  Republican  prospects  but  also  shifted  the
party’s balance to the right. Despite mastering the pop-
ulist appeal to the “silent majority,” the moderate Nixon
was never beloved by conservatives. His relaxation of
tensions with the Soviet Union and his visit to commu-
nist  China,  in  particular,  won  him  no  friends  on  the
right. His disgraceful exit benefitted the more conser-
vative  Republicans,  who  proceeded  to  reshape  the
party in their image.

Watergate Babies  As for the Democrats, Watergate
granted them a reprieve, a second chance at recaptur-
ing their eroding base. Backed by a public deeply dis-
enchanted  with  politicians,  especially  scandal-tainted
Republicans, congressional Democrats had an oppor-
tunity  to  repair  the  party’s  image.  Ford’s  pardon  of
Nixon  saved  the  nation  a  prolonged  and  agonizing
trial, which was Ford’s rationale, but it was decidedly
unpopular  among  the  public.  Pollster  Louis  Harris
remarked that should a politician “defend that pardon
in  any  part  of  this  country,  North  or  South,  [he]  is
almost  literally  going  to  have  his  head  handed  to
him.”  Democratic  candidates  in  the  1974  midterm
elections  made  Watergate  and  Ford’s  pardon  their
top  issues.  It  worked.  Seventy-five  new  Democratic
members of the House came to Washington in 1975,
many of them under the age of forty-five, and the press

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What changed and what
remained the same in
American politics as a result
of the Watergate scandal?

dubbed them Watergate babies.

Young  and  reform-minded,
the  Watergate  babies  solidified
huge  Democratic  majorities  in
both  houses  of  Congress  and
quickly  set  to  work.  They  elimi-
nated  the  House  Un-American

Activities Committee (HUAC), which had investigated
alleged Communists in the 1940s and 1950s and anti-
war  activists  in  the  1960s.  In  the  Senate,  Democrats
reduced the number of votes needed to end a filibuster
from 67 to 60 — a move intended to weaken the power
of  the  minority  to  block  legislation.  In  both  houses,
Democrats  dismantled  the  existing  committee  struc-
ture, which had entrenched power in the hands of a few
elite committee chairs. And in 1978, the Ethics in Gov-
ernment  Act  forced  political  candidates  to  disclose
financial contributions and limited the lobbying activ-
ities of former elected officials. Overall, the Watergate
babies helped to decentralize power in Washington and
bring greater transparency to American government.

In  one  of  the  great  ironies  of  American  political
history,  however,  the  post-Watergate  reforms  made
government less efficient and more susceptible to spe-
cial interests — the opposite of what had been intended.
Under the new committee structure, smaller subcom-
mittees proliferated, and the size of the congressional
staff  doubled  to  more  than  20,000.  A  diffuse  power
structure  actually  gave  lobbyists  more  places  to  exert
influence. As the power of committee chairs weakened,
influence shifted to party leaders, such as the Speaker
of the House and the Senate majority leader. With little
incentive to compromise, the parties grew more rigid,
and  bipartisanship  became  rare.  Finally,  filibustering,
a  seldom-used  tactic  largely  employed  by  anti–civil
rights  southerners,  increased  in  frequency.  The  Con-
gress that we have come to know today — with its par-
tisan rancor, its army of lobbyists, and its slow-moving
response to public needs — came into being in the 1970s.

Political Realignment  Despite Democratic gains in
1974,  the  electoral  realignment  that  had  begun  with
Richard Nixon’s presidential victories in 1968 and 1972
continued.  As  liberalism  proved  unable  to  stop  run-
away inflation or speed up economic growth, conser-
vatism  gained  greater  traction  with  the  public.  The
postwar liberal economic formula — sometimes known
as  the  Keynesian  consensus — consisted  of  micro-
adjustments to the money supply coupled with federal
spending. When that formula failed to restart the econ-
omy in the mid-1970s, conservatives in Congress used
this  opening  to  articulate  alternatives,  especially  eco-
nomic deregulation and tax cuts.

On a grander scale, deindustrialization in the North-
east and Midwest and continued population growth in
the Sunbelt was changing the political geography of the
country. Power was shifting, incrementally but percep-
tibly, toward the West and South (Table 29.1). As states
with strong trade unions at the center of the postwar

