CHAPTER 29

  The Search for Order in an Era of Limits, 1973–1980

949

TABLE 29.1

Political Realignment: Congressional Seats

State

Rust Belt

Massachusetts

Connecticut

New York

New Jersey

Pennsylvania

Ohio

Illinois

Indiana

Michigan

Wisconsin

Total

Sunbelt

California

Arizona

Nevada

Colorado

New Mexico

Texas

Georgia

North Carolina

Virginia

Florida

Total

Apportionment

1940

1990

  14

    6

  45

  14

  33

  23

  26

  11

  17

  10

199

  23

    2

    1

    4

    2

  21

  10

  12

    9

    6

  90

  10

    6

  31

  13

  21

  19

  20

  10

  16

    9

155

  52

    6

    2

    6

    3

  30

  11

  12

  11

  23

156

In the ﬁfty years between 1940 and 1990, the Rust Belt
states lost political clout, while the Sunbelt states gained it —
measured here in congressional seats (which are apportioned
based on population). Sunbelt states gained 66 seats, with
the Rust Belt losing 44. This shifting political geography
helped undermine the liberal coalition, which was strongest
in industrial states with large labor unions, and paved the way
for the rise of the conservative coalition, which was strongest
in southern and Bible Belt states, as well as California. Source:
Office of the Clerk of the House, clerk.house.gov/art_history/house
_history/congApp/bystate.html.

liberal political coalition — such as New York, Illinois,
and Michigan — lost industry, jobs, and people, states
with  traditions  of  libertarian  conservatism — such  as

California,  Arizona,  Florida,  and  Texas — gained
greater political clout. The full impact of this shifting
political  geography  would  not  be  felt  until  the  1980s
and 1990s, but its effects had become apparent by the
mid-1970s.

Jimmy Carter: The Outsider
as President
“Jimmy  who?”  was  how  journalists  first  responded
when James Earl Carter, who had been a naval officer, a
peanut farmer, and the governor of Georgia, emerged
from  the  pack  to  win  the  Democratic  presidential
nomination in 1976. When Carter told his mother that
he  intended  to  run  for  president,  she  had  asked,
“President  of  what?”  Trading  on  Watergate  and  his
down-home image, Carter pledged to restore morality
to the White House. “I will never lie to you,” he prom-
ised voters. Carter played up his credentials as a Wash-
ington outsider, although he selected Senator Walter F.
Mondale of Minnesota as his running mate, to ensure
his  ties  to  traditional  Democratic  voting  blocs.  Ford
still  might  have  prevailed,  but  his  pardon  of  Nixon
likely cost him enough votes in key states to swing the
election to the Democratic candidate. Carter won with
50 percent of the popular vote to Ford’s 48 percent.

For  a  time,  Carter  got  some  mileage  as  an  out-
sider — the  common  man  who  walked  to  the  White
House  after  the  inauguration  and  delivered  fireside
chats in a cardigan sweater. The fact that he was a born-
again Christian also played well. But Carter’s inexperi-
ence  began  to  show.  He  responded  to  feminists,  an
important Democratic constituency, by establishing a
new  women’s  commission  in  his  administration.  But
later  he  dismissed  the  commission’s  concerns  and
became  embroiled  in  a  public  fight  with  prominent
women’s advocates. Most consequentially, his outsider
strategy  made  for  chilly  relations  with  congressional
leaders.  Disdainful  of  the  Democratic  establishment,
Carter  relied  heavily  on  inexperienced  advisors  from
Georgia.  And  as  a  detail-oriented  micromanager,  he
exhausted himself over the fine points of policy better
left to his aides.

On the domestic front, Carter’s big challenge was
managing  the  economy.  The  problems  that  he  faced
defied  easy  solution.  Most  confounding  was  stagfla-
tion. If the government focused on inflation — forcing
prices down by raising interest rates — unemployment
became  worse.  If  the  government  tried  to  stimulate
employment,  inflation  became  worse.  None  of  the
levers of government economic policy seemed to work.
At  heart,  Carter  was  an  economic  conservative.  He

