950

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Carter lectured Americans about the nation’s “crisis of
the  spirit.”  He  called  energy  conservation  “the  moral
equivalent  of  war” — or,  in  the  media’s  shorthand,
“MEOW,” which aptly captured the nation’s assessment
of  Carter’s  sermonizing.  By  then,  his  approval  rating
had  fallen  below  30  percent.  And  it  was  no  wonder,
given an inflation rate over 11 percent, failing indus-
tries, and long lines at the pumps. It seemed the worst
of  all  possible  economic  worlds,  and  the  first-term
president could not help but worry about the political
costs to him and his party.

To see a longer excerpt of Carter’s TV address,
along with other primary sources from this period,
see Sources for America’s History.

Reform and Reaction
in the 1970s
Having lived through a decade of profound social and
political  upheaval — the  Vietnam  War,  protests,  riots,
Watergate, recession — many Americans were exhausted
and cynical by the mid-1970s. But while some retreated
to private concerns, others took reform in new direc-
tions. Civil rights battles continued, the women’s move-
ment achieved some of its most far-reaching aims, and
gay  rights  blossomed.  These  movements  pushed  the
“rights revolution” of the 1960s deeper into American
life.  Others,  however,  pushed  back.  Social  conserva-
tives  responded  by  forming  their  own  organizations
and resisting the emergence of what they saw as a per-
missive society.

Civil Rights in a New Era
When Congress banned job discrimination in the 1964
Civil Rights Act, the law required only that employers
hire  without  regard  to  “race,  color,  religion,  sex,  or
national  origin.”  But  after  centuries  of  slavery  and
decades of segregation, would nondiscrimination bring
African  Americans  into  the  economic  mainstream?
Many liberals thought not. They believed that govern-
ment,  universities,  and  private  employers  needed  to
take positive steps to open their doors to a wider, more
diverse range of Americans — including other minor-
ity groups and women.

Among  the  most  significant  efforts  to  address
the  legacy  of  exclusion  was  affirmative  action —
procedures  designed  to  take  into  account  the  disad-
vantaged  position  of  minority  groups  after  centuries

Jimmy Carter

President Jimmy Carter is seen here at a family picnic in
his hometown of Plains, Georgia, just after he received the
Democratic nomination for president in 1976. Carter was
content to portray himself as a political outsider, an ordinary
American who could restore trust to Washington after the
Watergate scandal. A thoughtful man and a born-again
Christian, Carter nonetheless proved unable to solve the
complex economic problems, especially high inﬂation, and
international challenges of the late 1970s. © Owen Franken/
Corbis.

toyed with the idea of an “industrial policy” to bail out
the ailing manufacturing sector, but he moved instead
in a free-market direction by lifting the New Deal–era
regulation of the airline, trucking, and railroad indus-
tries.  Deregulation  stimulated  competition  and  cut
prices, but it also drove firms out
of  business  and  hurt  unionized
workers.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
What kind of president did
Jimmy Carter hope to be,
and how successful was
he at implementing his
agenda?

The president’s efforts failed to
reignite  economic  growth.  Then,
the  Iranian  Revolution  curtailed
oil supplies, and gas prices jumped
again.  In  a  major  TV  address,

