CHAPTER 29

  The Search for Order in an Era of Limits, 1973–1980

951

March for Affirmative Action

Following the Supreme Court’s 1978 Bakke decision, Americans grew even more divided over the policy of
afﬁrmative action. For many people, such as African Americans and Latinos, afﬁrmative action promised that
groups who faced historical discrimination would have equal opportunity in jobs and education. For many
whites, afﬁrmative action looked like “reverse discrimination,” and they fought its implementation. AP/Wide
World Photos.

of  discrimination.  First  advanced  by  the  Kennedy
administration  in  1961,  affirmative  action  received  a
boost  under President Lyndon Johnson, whose Labor
Depart ment  fashioned  a  series  of  plans  in  the  late
1960s to encourage government contractors to recruit
underrepresented  racial  minorities.  Women  were
added  under  the  last  of  these  plans,  when  pressure
from the women’s movement highlighted the problem
of  sex  discrimination.  By  the  early  1970s,  affirmative
action had been refined by court rulings that identified
acceptable  procedures:  hiring  and  enrollment  goals,
special  recruitment  and  training  programs,  and  set-
asides (specially reserved slots) for both racial minority
groups and women.

Affirmative  action,  however,  did  not  please  many
whites, who felt that the deck was being stacked against
them.  Much  of  the  dissent  came  from  conservative
groups  that  had  opposed  civil  rights  all  along.  They
charged affirmative action advocates with “reverse dis-
crimination.”  Legal  challenges  abounded,  as  employ-
ees, students, and university applicants went to court to
object  to  these  new  procedures.  Some  liberal  groups
sought a middle position. In a widely publicized 1972
letter, Jewish organizations, seared by the memory of

quotas that once kept Jewish students out of elite col-
leges, came out against all racial quotas but nonetheless
endorsed  “rectifying  the  imbalances  resulting  from
past discrimination.”

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did afﬁrmative action
evolve between 1961 and
1978?

A major shift in affirmative action policy came in
1978.  Allan  Bakke,  a  white  man,  sued  the  University
of  California  at  Davis  Medical
School for rejecting him in favor
of  less-qualified  minority-group
candidates.  Headlines  across  the
country  sparked  anti–affirmative
action protest marches on college
campuses  and  vigorous  discus-
sion on television and radio and in the White House.
Ultimately,  the  Supreme  Court  rejected  the  medical
school’s quota system, which set aside 16 of 100 places
for “disadvantaged” students. The Court ordered Bakke
admitted but indicated that a more flexible affirmative
action plan, in which race could be considered along
with other factors, would still pass constitutional mus-
ter. Bakke v. University of California thus upheld affir-
mative  action  but,  by  rejecting  a  quota  system,  also
called it into question. Future court rulings and state
referenda, in the 1990s and 2000s, would further limit

