952

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

the scope of affirmative action. In particular, California
voters  passed  Propo sition  209  in  1996,  prohibiting
public  institutions  from  using  affirmative  action  to
increase diversity in employment and education.

The Women’s Movement
and Gay Rights
Unlike the civil rights movement, whose signal achieve-
ments came in the 1960s, the women’s and gay rights
movements flourished in the 1970s. With three influ-
ential wings — radical, liberal, and “Third World” — the
women’s movement inspired both grassroots activism
and  legislative  action  across  the  nation.  For  their
part,  gay  activists  had  further
to  go:  they  needed  to  convince
Americans  that  same-sex  rela-
tionships  were  natural  and  that
gay  men  and  lesbians  deserved
the same protection of the law as
all  other  citizens.  Neither  move-
ment achieved all of its aims in this era, but each laid a
strong foundation for the future.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did the idea of civil
rights expand during the
1970s?

Congress to reform rape laws. Many of these endeavors
and movements began as shoestring operations in liv-
ing rooms and kitchens: Our Bodies, Ourselves was first
published as a 35-cent mimeographed booklet, and the
antirape movement began in small consciousness-rais-
ing groups that met in churches and community cen-
ters.  By  the  end  of  the  decade,  however,  all  of  these
causes  had  national  organizations  and  touched  the
lives of millions of American women.

Equal Rights Amendment  Buoyed by this flourish-
ing  of  activism,  the  women’s  movement  renewed  the
fight  for  an  Equal  Rights  Amendment  (ERA)  to  the
Constitution. First introduced in 1923, the ERA stated,
in  its  entirety,  “Equality  of  rights  under  the  law  shall
not be denied or abridged by the United States or any
State on the basis of sex.” Vocal congressional women,
such as Patsy Mink (Democrat, Hawaii), Bella Abzug

Women’s Activism
In the first half of the 1970s, the
women’s  liberation  movement  reached  its  historic
peak. Taking a dizzying array of forms — from lobby-
ing  legislatures  to  marching  in  the  streets  and  estab-
lishing all-female collectives — women’s liberation pro-
duced activism on the scale of the earlier black-led civil
rights movement. Women’s centers, as well as women-
run  child-care  facilities,  began  to  spring  up  in  cities
and towns. A feminist art and poetry movement flour-
ished.  Women  challenged  the  admissions  policies  of
all-male colleges and universities — opening such pres-
tigious  universities  as  Yale  and  Columbia  and  nearly
bringing  an  end  to  male-only  institutions  of  higher
education. Female scholars began to transform higher
education: by studying women’s history, by increasing
the number of women on college and university facul-
ties, and by founding women’s studies programs.

Much  of  women’s  liberation  activism  focused  on
the female body. Inspired by the Boston collective that
first published Our Bodies, Ourselves — a groundbreak-
ing  book  on  women’s  health — the  women’s  health
movement founded dozens of medical clinics, encour-
aged women to become physicians, and educated mil-
lions of women about their bodies. To reform antiabor-
tion laws, activists pushed for remedies in more than
thirty state legislatures. Women’s liberationists founded
the antirape movement, established rape crisis centers
around  the  nation,  and  lobbied  state  legislatures  and

Phyllis Schlafly

Phyllis Schlaﬂy, leader of the organization STOP ERA, talks
with reporters during a rally at the Illinois State Capitol on
March 4, 1975, at a time when the state legislature was
considering whether to ratify the Equal Rights Amendment.
Schlaﬂy described herself as a housewife and called her stren-
uous political career a hobby. © Bettmann/Corbis.

