CHAPTER 29

  The Search for Order in an Era of Limits, 1973–1980

953

(Democrat, New York), and Shirley Chisholm (Demo-
crat, New York), found enthusiastic male allies — among
both  Democrats  and  Republicans — and  Congress
adopted the amendment in 1972. Within just two years,
thirty-four of the necessary thirty-eight states had rati-
fied it, and the ERA appeared headed for adoption. But
then, progress abruptly halted (Map 29.2).

Credit  for  putting  the  brakes  on  ERA  ratification
goes chiefly to a remarkable woman: Phyllis Schlafly, a
lawyer long active in conservative causes. Despite her
own flourishing career, Schlafly advocated traditional
roles for women. The ERA, she proclaimed, would cre-
ate an unnatural “unisex society,” with women drafted
into  the  army  and  forced  to  use  single-sex  toilets.
Abortion,  she  alleged,  could  never  be  prohibited  by
law. Led by Schlafly’s organization, STOP ERA (founded
in  1972),  thousands  of  women  mobilized,  showing
up  at  statehouses  with  home-baked  bread  and  apple
pies.  As  labels  on  baked  goods  at  one  anti-ERA  rally

expressed  it:  “My  heart  and  hand  went  into  this
dough / For the sake of the family please vote no.” It
was a message that resonated widely, especially among
those  troubled  by  the  rapid  pace  of  social  change
(American Voices, p. 954). The ERA never was ratified,
despite  a  congressional  extension  of  the  deadline  to
June 30, 1982.

Roe v. Wade
In  addition  to  the  ERA,  the  women’s
movement had identified another major goal: winning
reproductive rights. Activists pursued two tracks: legis-
lative and judicial. In the early 1960s, abortion was ille-
gal  in  virtually  every  state.  A  decade  later,  thanks  to
intensive  lobbying  by  women’s  organizations,  liberal
ministers, and physicians, a handful of states, such as
New York, Hawaii, California, and Colorado, adopted
laws making legal abortions easier to obtain. But prog-
ress after that was slow, and women’s advocates turned
to the courts. There was reason to be optimistic. The

WASH.
1973

OREGON
1973

MONTANA
1974

IDAHO
1972

WYOMING
1973

NEVADA

CALIF.
1972

UTAH

COLORADO
1972

ARIZONA

NEW
MEXICO
1973

HAWAII
1972

ALASKA
1972

NORTH
 DAKOTA
1974

SOUTH
 DAKOTA
1973

MINN.
1973

WIS.
1972

MICH.
1972

NEBRASKA
1972

IOWA
1972

ILL.

IND.
1977

OHIO
1974

KANSAS
1972

MO.

OKLAHOMA

ARK.

KY.
1972

TENNESSEE
1972

N.Y.
1972

PA.
1972

W.VA.
1972

VIRGINIA

NORTH
CAROLINA

S.C.

VT.
1973

ME.
1974

N.H.
1972

MASS.
1972
R.I.
1972

CT.
1973

N.J.
1972

DEL.
1972
MD.
1973

MISS. ALA.

GA.

TEXAS
1972

LA.

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

FLA.

Ratifying
1972
1973
1974–1977

Not Ratifying

MAP 29.2
States Ratifying the Equal Rights Amendment, 1972–1977

The ratifying process for the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) went smoothly in 1972 and 1973
but then stalled. The turning point came in 1976, when ERA advocates lobbied extensively, par-
ticularly in Florida, North Carolina, and Illinois, but failed to sway the conservative legislatures
in those states. After Indiana ratiﬁed in 1977, the amendment still lacked three votes toward
the three-fourths majority needed for adoption. Efforts to revive the ERA in the 1980s were
unsuccessful, and it became a dead issue.

