A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Debating the Equal

Rights Amendment

Fifty  years  after  its  introduction,  the  Equal  Rights  Amendment  (“Equality  of
rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by
any State on account of sex”) ﬁnally met congressional approval in 1972 and was
sent to the states for ratiﬁcation. The amendment set off a furious debate, espe-
cially in the South and Midwest, and fell short of ratiﬁcation. Following are four
of the voices in that debate.

Phyllis Schlafly

Jerry Falwell

Lawyer and political activist Phyllis Schlaﬂy was the most
prominent opponent of the ERA. Her organization, STOP
ERA, campaigned against the amendment in critical states
and helped to halt ratiﬁcation.

Jerry  Falwell  was  a  fundamentalist  Baptist  preacher  in
Virginia,  a  television  evangelist,  and  the  founder  of  the
political  lobbying  organization  known  as  the  Moral
Majority.

Women’s magazines, the women’s pages of newspapers,
and television and radio talk shows have been filled for
months with a strident advocacy of the “rights” of women
to be treated on an equal basis with men in all walks of
life. But what about the rights of the woman who doesn’t
want to compete on an equal basis with men? Does she
have the right to be treated as a woman — by her family,
by society, and by the law? . . .

The laws of every one of our 50 states now guarantee
the right to be a woman — protected and provided for in
her career as a woman, wife, and mother. The proposed
Equal Rights Amendment will wipe out all our laws which —
through rights, benefits, and exemptions — guarantee
this right to be a woman. . . . Is this what American
women want? Is this what American men want?

The laws of every one of the 50 states now require
the husband to support his wife and children — and to
provide a home for them to live in. In other words, the
law protects a woman’s right to be a full-time wife and
mother, her right not to take a job outside the home,
her right to care for her own baby in her own home
while being financially supported by her husband. . . .
There are two very different types of women lobby-
ing for the Equal Rights Amendment. One group is the
women’s liberationists. Their motive is totally radical.
They hate men, marriage, and children. They are out to
destroy morality and the family. . . . There is another type
of woman supporting the Equal Rights Amendment from
the most sincere motives. It is easy to see why the busi-
ness and professional women are supporting the Equal
Rights Amendment — many of them have felt the keen
edge of discrimination in their employment.

Source: From The Phyllis Schlafly Report, November 1972. Reprinted by permission.

954

I believe that at the foundation of the women’s liberation
movement there is a minority core of women who were
once bored with life, whose real problems are spiritual
problems. Many women have never accepted their God-
given roles. . . . God Almighty created men and women
biologically different and with differing needs and roles.
He made men and women to complement each other
and to love each other. . . . Women who work should be
respected and accorded dignity and equal rewards for
equal work. But this is not what the present feminist
movement and equal rights movement are all about.

The Equal Rights Amendment is a delusion. I believe
that women deserve more than equal rights. And, in fam-
ilies and in nations where the Bible is believed, Christian
women are honored above men. Only in places where the
Bible is believed and practiced do women receive more
than equal rights. Men and women have differing
strengths. The Equal Rights Amendment can never do
for women what needs to be done for them. Women
need to know Jesus Christ as their Lord and Savior
and be under His Lordship. They need a man who
knows Jesus Christ as his Lord and Savior, and they
need to be part of a home where their husband is a
godly leader and where there is a Christian family. . . .

ERA is not merely a political issue, but a moral issue
as well. A definite violation of holy Scripture, ERA defies
the mandate that “the husband is the head of the wife,
even as Christ is the head of the church” (Ep. 5:23). In 1
Peter 3:7 we read that husbands are to give their wives
honor as unto the weaker vessel, that they are both heirs
together of the grace of life. Because a woman is weaker
does not mean that she is less important.

Source: Excerpt from Listen America! by Jerry Falwell, copyright © 1980 by Jerry
Falwell. Used by permission of Doubleday, an imprint of the Knopf Doubleday
Publishing Group, a division of Random House LLC. All rights reserved. Any third
party use of this material, outside of this publication, is prohibited. Interested parties
must apply directly to Random House LLC for permission.

