Elizabeth Duncan Koontz

Caroline Bird

Elizabeth  Duncan  Koontz  was  a  distinguished  educator
and the ﬁrst black woman to head the National Education
Association and the U.S. Women’s Bureau. At the time she
made  this  statement  at  state  legislative  hearings  on  the
ERA  in  1977,  she  was  assistant  state  superintendent  for
public instruction in North Carolina.

A short time ago I had the misfortune to break my foot. . . .
The pain . . . did not hurt me as much as when I went into
the emergency room and the young woman upon asking
me my name, the nature of my ailment, then asked me for
my husband’s social security number and his hospitaliza-
tion number. I asked her what did that have to do with
my emergency.

And she said, “We have to be sure of who is going to

pay your bill.” I said, “Suppose I’m not married, then.”
And she said, “Then give me your father’s name.” I did
not go through that twenty years ago when I was denied
the use of that emergency room because of my color.

I went through that because there is an underlying
assumption that all women in our society are protected,
dependent, cared for by somebody who’s got a social
security number and hospitalization insurance. Never
once did she assume I might be a woman who might be
caring for my husband, instead of him by me, because of
some illness. She did not take into account the fact that
one out of almost eight women heading families in pov-
erty today [is] in the same condition as men in families
and poverty. . . .

My greater concern is that so many women today . . .
oppose the passage of the ERA very sincerely and . . . tell
you without batting an eye, “I don’t want to see women
treated that way.” And I speak up, “What way is that?” . . .
Women themselves have been a bit misguided. We have
mistaken present practice for law, and women have . . .
assumed too many times that their present condition can-
not change. The rate of divorce, the rate of desertion, the
rate of separation, and the death rate of male supporters
is enough for us to say: “Let us remove all legal barriers to
women and girls making their choices — this state cannot
afford it.”

Source: William A. Link and Marjorie Spruill Wheeler, eds., The South in the History of
the Nation (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 1999), 295–296.

Caroline Bird was the lead author of What Women Want,
a report produced by women’s rights advocates following
the 1977 National Women’s Conference, held in Houston,
Texas.

The Declaration of Independence, signed in 1776, stated
that “all Men are created equal” and that governments
derive their powers “from the Consent of the Governed.”
Women were not included in either concept. The original
American Constitution of 1787 was founded on English
common law, which did not recognize women as citizens
or as individuals with legal rights. A woman was expected
to obey her husband or nearest male kin, and if she was
married her person and her property were owned by her
husband. . . .

It has been argued that the ERA is not necessary
because the Fourteenth Amendment, passed after the
Civil War, guarantees that no state shall deny to “any
person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the
laws.” . . .

Aside from the fact that women have been subjected
to varying, inconsistent, and often unfavorable decisions
under the Fourteenth Amendment, the Equal Rights
Amendment is a more immediate and effective remedy to
sex discrimination in Federal and State laws than case-by-
case interpretation under the Fourteenth Amendment
could ever be.

Source: Caroline Bird, What Women Want (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1978),
120–121.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Schlaﬂy and Koontz have different notions of what it
means to be a woman. Explain what these differences
are and how they inform the authors’ distinct views of
the ERA.

2.  Why does Schlaﬂy believe that women will be harmed

by the ERA?

3.  Schlaﬂy and Falwell argue that women need the protec-
tion and support of men. Are they right? How would
Koontz likely respond?

4.  How do each of the four authors deﬁne women’s roles

and responsibilities in society?

955

