956

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

Supreme Court had first addressed reproductive rights
in a 1965 case, Griswold v. Connecticut. Griswold struck
down an 1879 state law prohibiting the possession of
contraception as a violation of married couples’ consti-
tutional “right of privacy.” Following the logic articu-
lated  in  Griswold,  the  Court  gradually  expanded  the
right of privacy in a series of cases in the late 1960s and
early 1970s.

Those cases culminated in Roe v. Wade (1973). In
that  landmark  decision,  the  justices  nullified  a  Texas
law that prohibited abortion under any circumstances,
even when the woman’s health was at risk, and laid out
a new national standard: Abortions performed during
the  first  trimester  were  protected  by  the  right  of  pri-
vacy. At the time and afterward, some legal authorities
questioned  whether  the  Constitution  recognized  any
such privacy right and criticized the Court’s seemingly
arbitrary  first-trimester  timeline.  Nevertheless,  the
Supreme Court chose to move forward, transforming a
traditionally state-regulated policy into a national, con-
stitutionally protected right.

For  the  women’s  movement,  Roe  v.  Wade  repre-
sented a triumph. For evangelical and fundamentalist
Christians,  Catholics,  and  conservatives  generally,  it
was a bitter pill. In their view, abortion was, unequivo-
cally, the taking of a human life. These Americans, rep-
resented by groups such as the National Right to Life
Committee,  did  not  believe  that  something  they
regarded as immoral and sinful could be the basis for

women’s  equality.  Women’s  advocates  responded  that
illegal abortions — common prior to Roe — were often
unsafe procedures, which resulted in physical harm to
women and even death. Roe polarized what was already
a sharply divided public and mobilized conservatives
to seek a Supreme Court reversal or, short of that, to
pursue legislation that would strictly limit the condi-
tions  under  which  abortions  could  be  performed.  In
1976, they convinced Congress to deny Medicaid funds
for abortions, an opening round in a campaign against
Roe v. Wade that continues today.

Harvey Milk  The gay rights movement had achieved
notable victories as well. These, too, proved controver-
sial.  More  than  a  dozen  cities  had  passed  gay  rights
ordinances by the mid-1970s, protecting gay men and
lesbians  from  employment  and  housing  discrimina-
tion.  One  such  ordinance  in  Dade  County  (Miami),
Florida, sparked a protest led by Anita Bryant, a con-
servative  Baptist  and  a  television  celebrity.  Her  “Save
Our  Children”  campaign  in  1977,  which  garnered
national media attention, resulted in the repeal of the
ordinance and symbolized the emergence of a conser-
vative religious movement opposed to gay rights.

Across the country from Miami, developments in
San  Francisco  looked  promising  for  gay  rights  advo-
cates, then turned tragic. No one embodied the combi-
nation of gay liberation and hard-nosed politics better
than  a  San  Francisco  camera-shop  owner  named

Harvey Milk

In November 1977, Harvey Milk became the
ﬁrst openly gay man to be elected to public
ofﬁce in the United States, when he won a
seat on the San Francisco Board of Supervi-
sors. Shockingly, almost exactly a year from
the day of his election, Milk was assassinated.
© Bettmann/Corbis.

