CHAPTER 29

  The Search for Order in an Era of Limits, 1973–1980

957

Harvey  Milk.  A  closeted  businessman  in  New  York
until  he  was  forty,  Milk  arrived  in  San  Francisco  in
1972 and threw himself into city politics. Fiercely inde-
pendent,  he  ran  as  an  openly  gay  candidate  for  city
supervisor (city council) twice and the state assembly
once, both times unsuccessfully.

By mobilizing the “gay vote” into a powerful bloc,
Milk finally won a supervisor seat in 1977. He was not
the  first  openly  gay  elected  official  in  the  country —
Kathy  Kozachenko  of  Michigan  and  Elaine  Noble  of
Massachusetts share that distinction — but he became
a  national  symbol  of  emerging  gay  political  power.
Tragically, after he helped to win passage of a gay rights
ordinance  in  San  Francisco,  he  was  assassinated  in
1978 — along with the city’s mayor, George Moscone —
by a disgruntled former supervisor named Dan White.
When  White  was  convicted  of  manslaughter  rather
than  murder,  five  thousand  gays  and  lesbians  in  San
Francisco marched on city hall.

After the Warren Court
In response to what conservatives considered the lib-
eral judicial revolution under the Warren Court, Pres-
ident  Nixon  came  into  the  presidency  promising  to
appoint “strict constructionists” (conservative-minded
justices)  to  the  bench.  In  three  short  years,  between
1969 and 1972, he was able to appoint four new justices
to the Supreme Court, including the new chief justice,
Warren  Burger.  Surprisingly,  despite  the  conservative
credentials  of  its  new  members,  the  Burger  Court
refused to scale back the liberal precedents set under
Warren. Most prominently, in Roe v. Wade the Burger
Court extended the “right of privacy” developed under
Warren to include women’s access to abortion. As we
saw above, few Supreme Court decisions in the twenti-
eth century have disappointed conservatives more.

In a variety of cases, the Burger Court either con-
firmed  previous  liberal  rulings  or  chose  a  centrist
course.  In  1972,  for  instance,  the  Court  deepened  its
intervention  in  criminal  procedure  by  striking  down
all  existing  capital  punishment  laws,  in  Furman  v.
Georgia. In response, Los Angeles police chief Ed Davis
accused  the  Court  of  establishing  a  “legal  oligarchy”
that  had  ignored  the  “perspective  of  the  average  citi-
zen.” He and other conservatives vowed a nationwide
campaign to bring back the death penalty — which was
in  fact  shortly  restored,  in  Gregg  v.  Georgia  (1976).
Other decisions advanced women’s rights. In 1976, the
Court ruled that arbitrary distinctions based on sex in
the workplace and other arenas were unconstitutional,
and in 1986 that sexual harassment violated the Civil

Rights Act. These rulings helped women break employ-
ment barriers in the subsequent decades.

In  all  of  their  rulings  on  privacy  rights,  however,
the Burger Court was reluctant to move ahead of pub-
lic attitudes toward homosexuality. Gay men and lesbi-
ans still had no legal recourse if state laws prohibited
same-sex relations. In a controversial 1986 case, Bowers
v. Hardwick, the Supreme Court upheld a Georgia sod-
omy  statute  that  criminalized  same-sex  sexual  acts.
The  majority  opinion  held  that  homosexuality  was
contrary to “ordered liberty” and that extending sexual
privacy  to  gays  and  lesbians  “would  be  to  cast  aside
millennia of moral teaching.” Not until 2003 (Lawrence
v. Texas) would the Court overturn that decision, rec-
ognizing for all Americans the right to sexual privacy.

The American Family on Trial
In 1973, the Public Broadcasting System (PBS) aired a
twelve-part television series that followed the life of a
real  American  family.  Producers  wanted  the  show,
called simply An American Family, to document how a
middle-class white family coped with the stresses of a
changing society. They did not anticipate that the fam-
ily would dissolve in front of their cameras. Tensions
and arguments raged, and in the final episode, Bill, the
husband and father (who had had numerous extramar-
ital affairs), moved out. By the time the show aired, the
couple  was  divorced  and  Pat,  the  former  wife,  had
become a single working mother with five children.

An American Family captured a traumatic moment
in the twentieth-century history of the family. Between
1965 and 1985, the divorce rate doubled, and children
born in the 1970s had a 40 percent chance of spending
part  of  their  youth  in  a  single-parent  household.  As
wages stagnated and inflation pushed prices up, more
and more families depended on two incomes for sur-
vival.  Furthermore,  the  women’s  movement  and  the
counterculture had called into question traditional sex
roles — father as provider and mother as homemaker —
and middle-class baby boomers rebelled against what
they saw as the puritanical sexual values of their par-
ents’  generation.  In  the  midst  of  such  rapid  change,
where did the family stand?

Working Families in the Age
of Deindustrialization
One  of  the  most  striking  developments  of  the  1970s
and 1980s was the relative stagnation of wages. After
World War II, hourly wages had grown steadily ahead

