958

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

of  inflation,  giving  workers  more  buying  power  with
each passing decade. By 1973, that trend had stopped
in its tracks. The decline of organized labor, the loss of
manufacturing jobs, and runaway inflation all played a
role  in  the  reversal.  Hardest  hit  were  blue-collar  and
pink-collar workers and those without college degrees.

Women Enter the Workforce  Millions of wives and
mothers had worked for wages for decades. But many
Americans still believed in the “family wage”: a bread-
winner income, earned by men, sufficient to support a
family.  After  1973,  fewer  and  fewer  Americans  had
access to that luxury. Between 1973 and the early 1990s,
every  major  income  group  except  the  top  10  percent
saw their real earnings (accounting for inflation) either
remain the same or decline. Over this period, the typi-
cal worker saw a 10 percent drop
in real wages. To keep their fami-
lies  from  falling  behind,  women
streamed
the  workforce.
Between 1950 and 1994, the pro-
portion  of  women  ages  25  to  54
working  for  pay  increased  from
37  to  75  percent.  Much  of  that
increase  occurred  in  the  1970s.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
Why did the struggles of
working families become
more prominent in the
1970s, and what social and
economic concerns did
those families have?

into

s
e
i
l
i

m
a
F
e
l
p
u
o
C
-
d
e
i
r
r
a
M

f
o
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Americans were fast becoming dependent on the two-
income household (Figure 29.5).

The numbers tell two different stories of American
life  in  these  decades.  On  the  one  hand,  the  trends
unmistakably  show  that  women,  especially  in  blue-
collar and pink-collar families, had to work for wages
to sustain their family’s standard of living: to buy a car,
pay for college, afford medical bills, support an aging
parent, or simply pay the rent. Moreover, the number
of  single  women  raising  children  nearly  doubled
between 1965 and 1990. Women’s paid labor was mak-
ing up for the declining earning power or the absence
of men in American households. On the other hand,
women’s  real  income  overall  grew  during  the  same
period. This increase reflected the opening of profes-
sional and skilled jobs to educated baby-boomer women.
As older barriers began to fall, women poured into law
and medicine, business and government, and, though
more slowly, the sciences and engineering. Beneficiaries
of  feminism,  these  women  pursued  careers  of  which
their mothers had only dreamed.

Workers  in  the  National  Spotlight  For  a  brief
period  in  the  1970s,  the  trials  of  working  men  and
women  made  a  distinct  imprint  on  national  culture.

FIGURE 29.5
The Increase in Two-Worker Families

In 1968, about 43 percent of married
couples sent both the husband and
the wife into the workforce; thirty
years later, 60 percent were two-
earner fami lies. The percentage
of families in which the wife alone
worked increased from 3 to 5 per-
cent during these years, while those
with no earners (welfare recipients
and, increasingly, retired couples)
rose from 8 to 13 percent. Because
these ﬁgures do not include unmarried
persons and most illegal immigrants,
they do not give a complete picture
of the American workplace. But there
is no doubt that women now play a
major role in the workforce.

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

Both are earners

Husband only

No earners

Wife only

