CHAPTER 29

  The Search for Order in an Era of Limits, 1973–1980

959

Blue-Collar Blues

Unemployment in the 1970s affected
blue-collar workers most, with many
factories closing and new construction
at a standstill. In many cities, joblessness
among construction workers stood between
20 and 30 percent. In this 1976 photo, an
unemployed carpenter in Cleveland, Ohio,
ﬁles for unemployment insurance. The “blue-
collar blues” caused by long unemployment
lines, high inﬂation, and difﬁcult economic
times hit American workers hard in the late
1970s. © 1976 Settle/The New York Times
Company. Reprinted with Permission.

Reporters  wrote  of  the  “blue-collar  blues”  associated
with plant closings and the hard-fought strikes of the
decade. A 1972 strike at the Lordstown, Ohio, General
Motors plant captivated the nation. Holding out not for
higher wages but for better working conditions — the
plant  had  the  most  complex  assembly  line  in  the
nation — Lordstown  strikers  spoke  out  against  what
they saw as an inhumane industrial system. Across the
nation, the number of union-led strikes surged, even as
the number of Americans in the labor movement con-
tinued to decline. In Lordstown and most other sites of

strikes and industrial conflict, workers won a measure
of public attention but typically gained little economic
ground.

When Americans turned on their televisions in the
mid-1970s, the most popular shows reflected the “blue-
collar  blues”  of  struggling  families.  All  in  the  Family
was joined by The Waltons, set during the Great Depres-
sion. Good Times, Welcome Back, Kotter, and Sanford
and  Son  dealt  with  poverty  in  the  inner  city.  The
Jeffersons  featured  an  upwardly  mobile  black  couple.
Laverne and Shirley focused on young working women

Good Times

The popular 1970s sitcom Good Times
examined how the “blue-collar blues”
affected a working-class black family
struggling to make ends meet in tough
economic times. The show’s theme song
spoke of “temporary layoffs . . . easy credit
ripoffs . . . scratchin’ and surviving.” Its
actors, many of them classically trained,
brought a realistic portrait of working-
class African American life to television.
© Bettmann/Corbis.

