960

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

in the 1950s and One Day at a Time on working women
in  the  1970s  making  do  after  divorce.  The  most-
watched  television  series  of  the  decade,  1977’s  eight-
part Roots, explored the history of slavery and the sur-
vival  of  African  American  culture  and  family  roots
despite  the  oppressive  labor  system.  Not  since  the
1930s had American culture paid such close attention
to working-class life.

The decade also saw the rise of musicians such as
Bruce Springsteen, Johnny Paycheck, and John Cougar
(Mellencamp), who became stars by turning the hard-
scrabble  lives  of  people  in  small  towns  and  working-
class communities into rock anthems that filled arenas.
Springsteen wrote songs about characters who “sweat it
out in the streets of a runaway American dream,” and,
to the delight of his audience, Paycheck famously sang,
“Take this job and shove it!” Meanwhile, on the streets
of  Harlem  and  the  South  Bronx  in New  York,  young
working-class  African  American  men  experimenting
with dance and musical forms invented break dancing
and  rap  music — styles  that  expressed  both  the  hard-
ship and the creativity of working-class black life in the
deindustrialized American city.

Navigating the Sexual Revolution
The  economic  downturn  was  not  the  only  force  that
placed stress on American families in this era. Another
such force was what many came to call the “sexual rev-
olution.” Hardly revolutionary, sexual attitudes in the
1970s were, in many ways, a logical evolution of devel-
opments  in  the  first  half  of  the  twentieth  century.
Beginning in the 1910s, Americans increasingly viewed
sex  as  a  component  of  personal  happiness,  distinct
from  reproduction.  Attitudes  toward  sex  grew  even
more lenient in the postwar decades, a fact reflected in
the Kinsey studies of the 1940s and 1950s. By the 1960s,
sex before marriage had grown more socially accept-
able — an especially profound change for women — and
frank discussions of sex in the media and popular cul-
ture had grown more common.

In  that  decade,  three  developments  dramatically
accelerated this process: the introduction of the birth
control pill, the rise of the baby-boomer-led counter-
culture,  and  the  influence  of  feminism.  First  made
available  in  the  United  States  in
1960,  the  birth  control  pill  gave
women an unprecedented degree
of  control  over  reproduction.  By
1965, more than 6 million Ameri-
can women were taking advantage
of  this  pharmaceutical  advance.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What were three major
consequences of the sexual
revolution of the 1960s
and 1970s?

Rapid shifts in attitude accompanied the technological
breakthrough. Middle-class baby boomers embraced a
sexual ethic of greater freedom and, in many cases, a
more casual approach to sex outside marriage. “I just
feel I am expressing myself the way I feel at that moment
in  the  most  natural  way,”  a  female  California  college
student, explaining her sex life, told a reporter in 1966.
The rebellious counterculture encouraged this attitudi-
nal shift by associating a puritanical view of sex with
their parents’ generation.

Finally, women’s rights activists reacted to the new
emphasis  on  sexual  freedom  in  at  least  two  distinct
ways.  Many  feminists  felt  that  the  sexual  revolution
was by and for men: the emphasis on casual sex seemed
to  perpetuate  male  privilege — the  old  double  stan-
dard;  sexual  harassment  was  all  too  common  in  the
workplace; and the proliferation of pornography con-
tinued to commercialize women as sex objects. On the
other hand, they remained optimistic that the new sex-
ual  ethic  could  free  women  from  those  older  moral
constraints. They called for a revolution in sexual val-
ues, not simply behavior, that would end exploitation
and grant women the freedom to explore their sexual-
ity on equal terms with men.

Sex and Popular Culture
In the 1970s, popular cul-
ture was suffused with discussions of the sexual revolu-
tion. Mass-market books with titles such as Everything
You Always Wanted to Know About Sex, Human Sexual
Response, and The Sensuous Man shot up the best-seller
list. William Masters and Virginia Johnson became the
most  famous  sex  researchers  since  Alfred  Kinsey  by
studying  couples  in  the  act  of  lovemaking.  In  1972,
English physician Alex Comfort published The Joy of
Sex,  a  guidebook  for  couples  that  became  one  of  the
most popular books of the decade. Comfort made cer-
tain  to  distinguish  his  writing  from  pornographic
exploitation. “Sex is the one place where we today can
learn to treat people as people,” he wrote.

Hollywood took advantage of the new sexual ethic
by making films with explicit erotic content that pushed
the  boundaries  of  middle-class  taste.  Films  such  as
Midnight  Cowboy  (1969),  Carnal  Knowledge  (1971),
and  Shampoo  (1974),  the  latter  starring  Hollywood’s
leading  ladies’  man,  Warren  Beatty,  led  the  way.
Throughout the decade, and into the 1980s, the Motion
Picture Association of America (MPAA) scrambled to
keep  its  guide for  parents — the  system  of  rating  pic-
tures  G,  PG,  R,  and  X  (and,  after  1984,  PG-13) — in
tune with Hollywood’s advancing sexual revolution.

On  television,  the  popularity  of  social  problem
shows, such as All in the Family, and the fear of losing

