CHAPTER 29

  The Search for Order in an Era of Limits, 1973–1980

961

But what defined a healthy marriage in an age of rising
divorce rates, changing sexual values, and feminist cri-
tiques of the nuclear family? Only a small minority of
Americans rejected marriage outright; most continued
to create monogamous relationships codified in mar-
riage. But many came to believe that they needed help
as marriage came under a variety of economic and psy-
chological stresses.

A therapeutic industry arose in response. Churches
and secular groups alike established marriage seminars
and counseling services to assist couples in sustaining a
healthy marriage. A popular form of 1960s psychother-
apy,  the  “encounter  group,”  was  adapted  to  marriage
counseling: couples met in large groups to explore new
methods of communicating. One of the most success-
ful  of  these  organizations,  Marriage  Encounter,  was
founded  by  the  Catholic  Church.  It  expanded  into
Protestant  and  Jewish  communities  in  the  1970s  and
became one of the nation’s largest counseling organiza-
tions. Such groups embodied another long-term shift
in how middle-class Americans understood marriage.
Spurred  by  both  feminism  and  psychotherapeutic
models  that  stressed  self-improvement,  Americans
increasingly defined marriage not simply by compan-
ionship and sexual fidelity but also by the deeply felt
emotional connection between two people.

Religion in the 1970s: The Fourth
Great Awakening
For three centuries, American society has been punc-
tuated  by  intense  periods  of  religious  revival — what
historians  have  called  Great  Awakenings  (Chapters  4
and 8). These periods have seen a rise in church mem-
bership, the appearance of charismatic religious lead-
ers, and the increasing influence of religion, usually of
the  evangelical  variety,  on  society  and  politics.  One
such awakening, the fourth in U.S. history, took shape
in the 1970s and 1980s. It had many elements, but one
of its central features was a growing concern with the
family.

In  the  1950s  and  1960s,  many  mainstream  Prot-
estants  had  embraced  the  reform  spirit  of  the  age.
Some of the most visible Protestant leaders were social
activists  who  condemned  racism  and  opposed  the
Vietnam War. Organizations such as the National Coun-
cil of Churches — along with many progressive Catho-
lics  and  Jews — joined  with  Martin  Luther  King  Jr.
and  other  African  American  ministers  in  the  long
battle  for  civil  rights.  Many  mainline  Protestant
churches, among them the Episcopal, Methodist, and
Congregationalist denominations, practiced a version

Midnight Cowboy

In the mid-1970s, the movie industry embraced the “sexual
revolution” and pushed the boundaries of middle-class taste.
Movies such as Midnight Cowboy (1975) — starring Dustin
Hoffman and Jon Voight — were part of a larger shift in
American culture in which frank sexual discussions and
the portrayal of sexual situations in various media grew
more acceptable. John Springer Collection/Corbis.

advertising revenue moderated the portrayal of sex in
the  early  1970s.  However,  in  the  second  half  of  the
decade networks both exploited and criticized the new
sexual  ethic.  In  frivolous,  lighthearted  shows  such  as
the popular Charlie’s Angels, Three’s Company, and The
Love  Boat,  heterosexual  couples  explored  the  often
confusing,  and  usually  comical,  landscape  of  sexual
morality. At the same time, between 1974 and 1981, the
major  networks  produced  more  than  a  dozen  made-
for-TV  movies  about  children  in  sexual  danger — a
sensationalized  warning  to  parents  of  the  potential
threats  to  children  posed  by  a  less  strict  sexual
morality.

Middle-Class  Marriage  Many  Americans  worried
that  the  sexual  revolution  threatened  marriage  itself.
The  notion  of  marriage  as  romantic  companionship
had  defined  middle-class  norms  since  the  late  nine-
teenth century. It  was also quite common throughout
most of the twentieth century for Americans to see sex-
ual satisfaction as a healthy part of the marriage bond.

