962

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

of the “Social Gospel,” the reform-minded Christianity
of the early twentieth century.

Evangelical  Resurgence  Meanwhile,  evangelical-
ism survived at the grass roots. Evangelical Protestant
churches  emphasized  an  intimate,  personal  salvation
(being “born again”); focused on a
literal interpretation of the Bible;
and regarded the death and resur-
rection  of  Jesus  as  the  central
message  of  Christianity.  These
tenets  distinguished  evangelicals

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did evangelical Chris-
tianity inﬂuence American
society in the 1970s?

from  mainline  Prot est ants  as  well  as  from  Catholics
and Jews, and they flourished in a handful of evangeli-
cal colleges, Bible schools, and seminaries in the post-
war decades.

No one did more to keep the evangelical fire burn-
ing than Billy Graham. A graduate of the evangelical
Wheaton College in Illinois, Graham cofounded Youth
for  Christ  in  1945  and  then  toured  the  United  States
and  Europe  preaching  the  gospel.  Following  a  stun-
ning 1949 tent revival in Los Angeles that lasted eight
weeks,  Graham  shot  to  national  fame.  His  success
in  Los  Angeles  led  to  a  popular  radio  program,  but

Televangelism

Television minister (“televangelist”) and conservative political activist Pat Robertson, shown here in the con-
trol room of his 700 Club TV show, was a leading ﬁgure in the resurgence of evangelical Christianity in the
1970s and 1980s. Reaching millions of viewers through their television ministries, men such as Robertson
built huge churches and large popular followings. © Wally McNamee/CORBIS

