CHAPTER 29

  The Search for Order in an Era of Limits, 1973–1980

963

he  continued  to  travel  relentlessly,  conducting  old-
fashioned revival meetings he called crusades. A mas-
sive sixteen-week 1957 crusade held in New York City’s
Madison Square Gar den made Graham, along with the
conservative Catho lic priest Fulton Sheen, one of the
nation’s most visible religious leaders.

Graham  and  other  evangelicals  in  the  1950s  and
1960s  laid  the  groundwork  for  the  Fourth  Great
Awakening. But it was a startling combination of events
in the late 1960s and early 1970s that sparked the evan-
gelical revival. First, rising divorce rates, social unrest,
and challenges to prevailing values led people to seek
the stability of faith. Second, many Americans regarded
feminism, the counterculture, sexual freedom, homo-
sexuality,  pornography,  and  legalized  abortion  not  as
distinct issues, but as a collective sign of moral decay in
society. To seek answers and find order, more and more
people  turned  to  evangelical  ministries,  especially
Southern Baptist, Pentecostal, and Assemblies of God
churches.

Numbers tell part of the story. As mainline churches
lost  about  15  percent  of  their  membership  between
1970 and 1985, evangelical church membership soared.
The  Southern  Baptist  Convention,  the  largest  Protes-
tant  denomination,  grew  by  23  percent,  while  the
Assemblies of God grew by an astounding 300 percent.
News week  magazine  declared  1976  “The  Year  of  the
Evangelical,”  and  that  November  the  nation  made
Jimmy  Carter  the  nation’s  first  evangelical  president.
In  a  national  Gallup  poll,  34  percent  of  Americans
answered yes when asked, “Would you describe your-
self as a ‘born again’ or evangelical Christian?”

Much  of  this  astonishing  growth  came  from  the
creative  use  of  television.  Graham  had  pounded  the
pavement and worn out shoe leather to reach his con-
verts. But a new generation of preachers brought reli-
gious conversion directly into Americans’ living rooms
through television. These so-called televangelists built
huge  media  empires  through  small  donations  from
millions of avid viewers — not to mention advertising.
Jerry Falwell’s Old Time Gospel Hour, Pat Robertson’s
700 Club, and Jim and Tammy Bakker’s PTL (Praise the
Lord) Club were the leading pioneers in this televised
race  for  American  souls,  but  another  half  dozen —
including Oral Roberts and Jimmy Swaggart — followed
them onto the airwaves. Together, they made the 1970s
and 1980s the era of Christian broadcasting.

Religion  and  the  Family  Of  primary  concern  to
evangelical  Christians  was  the  family.  Drawing  on
selected  Bible  passages,  evangelicals  believed  that  the

nuclear family, and not the individual, represented the
fundamental unit of society. The family itself was orga-
nized  along  paternalist  lines:  father  was  breadwinner
and disciplinarian; mother was nurturer and supporter.
“Motherhood  is  the  highest  form  of  femininity,”  the
evangelical author Beverly LaHaye wrote in an influen-
tial  book  on  Christian  women.  Another  popular
Christian author declared, “A  church, a family, a nation
is only as strong as its men.”

Evangelicals spread their message about the Chris-
tian  family  through  more  than  the  pulpit  and  televi-
sion.  They  founded  publishing  houses,  wrote  books,
established foundations, and offered seminars. Helen B.
Andelin,  for  instance,  a  California  housewife,  pro-
duced  a  homemade  book  called  Fascinating  Woman-
hood that eventually sold more than 2 million copies.
She used the book as the basis for her classes, which by
the early 1970s had been attended by 400,000 women
and  boasted  11,000  trained  teachers.  Fascinating
Womanhood  led  evangelical  women  in  the  opposite
direction of feminism. Whereas the latter encouraged
women  to  be  independent  and  to  seek  equality  with
men, Andelin taught that “submissiveness will bring a
strange but righteous power over your man.” Andelin
was but one of dozens of evangelical authors and edu-
cators who encouraged women to defer to men.

Evangelical Christians held that strict gender roles
in  the  family  would  ward  off  the  influences  of  an
immoral  society.  Christian  activists  were  especially
concerned  with  sex  education  in  public  schools,  the
proliferation  of  pornography,  legalized  abortion,  and
the  rising  divorce  rate.  For  them,  the  answer  was  to
strengthen what they called “traditional” family struc-
tures. By the early 1980s, Christians could choose from
among hundreds of evangelical books, take classes on
how to save a marriage or how to be a Christian parent,
attend  evangelical  churches  and  Bible  study  courses,
watch evangelical ministers on television, and donate
to  foundations  that  promoted  “Christian  values”  in
state legislatures and the U.S. Congress.

Wherever one looked in the 1970s and early 1980s,
American families were under strain. Nearly everyone
agreed  that  the  waves  of  social  liberalism  and  eco-
nomic transformation that swept over the nation in the
1960s  and  1970s  had  destabilized  society  and,  espe-
cially,  family  relationships.  But  Americans  did  not
agree about how to restabilize families. Indeed, differ-
ent approaches to the family would further divide the
country  in  the  1980s  and  1990s,  as  the  New  Right
would  increasingly  make  “family  values”  a  political
issue.

