964

PART 8

  THE MODERN STATE AND THE AGE OF LIBERALISM, 1945–1980

“Family Values”

During the 1980 presidential campaign, the
Reverend Jerry Falwell, pictured here with
Phyllis Schlaﬂy, supported Ronald Reagan and
the Republican Party with “I Love America”
rallies around the country. Falwell, head of
the Moral Majority, helped to bring a new
focus on “family values” to American politics
in the late 1970s. This was a conservative
version of the emphasis on male-breadwinner
nuclear families that had long been charac-
teristic of American values. AP/Wide World
Photos.

SUMMARY
For much of the 1970s, Americans struggled with eco-
nomic problems, including inflation, energy shortages,
income  stagnation,  and  deindustrialization.  These
challenges highlighted the limits of postwar prosperity
and forced Americans to consider lowering their eco-
nomic  expectations.  A  movement  for  environmental
protection, widely supported, led to new laws and an
awareness of nature’s limits, and the energy crisis high-
lighted  the  nation’s  dependence  on  resources  from
abroad, especially oil.

In  the  midst  of  this  gloomy  economic  climate,
Americans  also  sought  political  and  cultural  resolu-
tions  to  the  upheavals  of  the  1960s.  In  politics,  the

Watergate  scandal  led  to  a  brief  period  of  political
reform. Meanwhile, the battle for civil rights entered a
second stage, expanding to encompass women’s rights,
gay rights, and the rights of alleged criminals and pris-
oners and, in the realm of racial justice, focusing on the
problem of producing concrete results rather than leg-
islation. Many liberals cheered these developments, but
another effect was to strengthen a new, more conserva-
tive social mood that began to challenge liberal values
in politics and society more generally. Finally, we con-
sidered the multiple challenges faced by the American
family in the 1970s and how a perception that the fam-
ily  was  in  trouble  helped  to  spur  an  evangelical  reli-
gious  revival  that  would  shape  American  society  for
decades to come.

