CHAPTER 29

  CHAPTER REVIEW

965

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key People

Rachel Carson (p. 939)
Gerald Ford (p. 947)
Howard Jarvis (p. 947)
Jimmy Carter (p. 949)
Phyllis Schlafly (p. 953)
Harvey Milk (p. 956)
Billy Graham (p. 962)

Key Concepts and Events

Organization of Petroleum

Exporting Countries (OPEC)
(p. 938)

energy crisis (p. 939)
environmentalism (p. 939)
Silent Spring (p. 939)
Earth Day (p. 939)
Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) (p. 939)
Three Mile Island (p. 942)
stagflation (p. 942)
deindustrialization (p. 944)
Rust Belt (p. 944)
tax revolt (p. 946)
Proposition 13 (p. 947)

Watergate (p. 947)
War Powers Act (p. 948)
Freedom of Information Act

(p. 948)

Ethics in Government Act

(p. 948)

deregulation (p. 950)
affirmative action (p. 950)
Bakke v. University of California

(p. 951)

Equal Rights Amendment (ERA)

(p. 952)

STOP ERA (p. 953)
Roe v. Wade (p. 956)
evangelicalism (p. 962)

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  Why did the U.S. economy struggle in the 1970s?
How  was  the  period  after  1973  different  from
1945–1972?

2.  How was the “rights liberalism” of this era different
from  the  “welfare  liberalism”  of  the  1930s  and
1940s?

3.  How was the American family of the 1970s differ-
ent from that of the 1950s? Without romanticizing
either  period,  how  would  you  account  for  the
differences?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Examine the
category  “Work,  Exchange,  and  Technology”  on
the thematic timeline on page 803. How did eco-
nomic  developments  in  the  1970s  reverse  the
course  the  national  economy  had  been  on  since
World  War  II?  More  broadly,  can  you  identify
events in each of the timeline categories that made
the  1970s  a  decade  of
important  historical
transition?

