966

PART 8

  CHAPTER REVIEW

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  Consider  the
history of the American economy in the twentieth
century.  Compare  the  1970s  with  other  eras:  the
Great Depression of the 1930s, the industrial boom
of the World War II years, and the growth and ris-
ing wages in the 1950s and 1960s. Using these com-
parisons,  construct  a  historical  narrative  of  the
period from the 1920s through the 1970s.

2.  VISUAL EVIDENCE  Study the photographs on
pages 943 and 959 and the map on page 944. How
did the economic downturn of the 1970s affect the
lives of ordinary Americans and American culture
broadly? What connections can you draw between
the  two  photographs  and  developments  in  the
global economy and the rise of the Sunbelt?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Jeffrey Hadden and Anson Shupe, Televangelism:
Power and Politics on God’s Frontier (1988). A
thought-provoking analysis of Christian broadcasting.

Rick Perlstein, Nixonland: The Rise of a President and
the Fracturing of America (2008). An excellent
overview of the era.

Daniel Horowitz, Jimmy Carter and the Energy Crisis
of the 1970s (2005). Analysis and documents.

N. E. H. Hull and Peter Charles Hoffer, Roe v. Wade:
The Abortion Rights Controversy in American History
(2001). A sweeping treatment of the controversial
decision.

Kirkpatrick Sale, The Green Revolution: The Amer-
ican Environmental Movement, 1962–1992 (1993).
A balanced account of environmentalism.

The Oyez Project at Northwestern University, at oyez
.org/oyez/frontpage, is an invaluable resource for
more than one thousand Supreme Court cases, with
audio transcripts, voting records, and summaries.

