Conservative Ascendancy

The 1980s constituted a crucial period in which the
forthright conservatism of Ronald Reagan and the
New Right was consolidated in the Republican Party
and challenged the aggressive liberalism of Lyndon
Johnson’s Great Society. Under Reagan, the conser-
vative agenda reduced the regulatory power of the
federal government, shrank the welfare state created
by liberal Democrats during the New Deal and the
Great Society, and expanded the military. Evangelical
Christians and conservative lawmakers challenged
abortion rights, feminism, and gay rights, setting
off a “culture war” that sharply divided Americans.
Even as the Reagan coalition brought an end to
decades of liberal government activism, much of the
legacy of the New Deal was preserved, and in some
instances expanded. Medicare, Medicaid, and Social
Security survived and grew as a proportion of the
federal budget. Conservatives put a stamp on U.S.
foreign policy, however, dramatically increasing the
defense budget and, under George W. Bush, assert-
ing a new doctrine of “preemptive war” that led to
a decades-long war in Iraq. By the presidential elec-
tion of 2012, national politics seemed as divided
as ever. Americans reelected Barack Obama but
returned a conservative majority to the House
of Representatives. Polls showed that Americans
embraced a moderate liberalism on such issues as
gay rights and taxes, but the national political sys-
tem remained mired in stalemate.

End of the Cold War and Rising
Conflict in the Middle East

Under Ronald Reagan, between 1981 and 1989 the
United States increased government military spending
and returned to the sharp Cold War rhetoric of earlier
decades. Yet during the second half of the 1980s,
as internal reforms swept through the Soviet Union,
Reagan softened his stance measuredly and engaged
in productive dialogue with the Soviet leader Mikhail
Gorbachev. Then, between 1989 and 1991, the
four-decade Cold War came to a stunning halt. The
Soviet Union and its satellite communist regimes in
Eastern Europe collapsed. The result was, in the words
of President George H. W. Bush, a “new world order.”
Without a credible rival, the United States emerged
in the 1990s as the lone military “superpower” in
the world. In the absence of a clear Cold War enemy,
it intervened in civil wars, worked to disrupt terrorist
activities, and provided humanitarian aid — but on a
case-by-case basis, guided more by pragmatism than
by principle.

The foremost region that occupied U.S. attention

was the Middle East, where strategic interest in oil
supplies remained paramount. Between 1991 and
2011, U.S. armed forces fought three wars in the
region — two in Iraq and one in Afghanistan — and
became even more deeply embedded in its politics.
The end of the Cold War thus brought a dramatic
expansion of the U.S. role in the Middle East and
renewed debates at home about the proper Ameri-
can role in the world.

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

969

