Global Capitalism
and the End of the
American Century
1980 to the Present

Thematic Understanding

This timeline arranges some of the important

events of this period into themes. Consider

the entries under “Ideas, Beliefs, and Culture”

and “Peopling.” What were the major events

of the “culture wars,” and how did American

attitudes and public policy change over the

decades between the 1980s and the 2010s?  >

Globalization and Increasing
Social Inequality

The post–World War II expansion of the American
economy had ended by the early 1970s. Wages
stagnated. Inﬂation skyrocketed. In the 1980s and
1990s, however, productivity increased, military spend-
ing boosted production, and new industries — such as
computer technology — emerged. These developments
led to renewed economic growth. More and more,
though, the economy produced services rather than
goods, which Americans increasingly bought from
overseas.

The fall of communism and the end of the Cold War
had made possible this global expansion of capitalism,
as multinational corporations moved production to
low-wage countries and international trade increased.
Governments across the world facilitated this process
by deregulating ﬁnancial markets and by creating new
trading zones such as the European Union (EU) and the
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).

Conservative tax policies, deindustrialization, the
decline of unions, and globalization all contributed to
a widening inequality between the wealthiest Ameri-
cans and the middle class and poor. Between 2007
and 2010, the negative side of global market deregu-
lation became apparent, as Europe and much of North
America suffered the worst economic downturn since
the Great Depression. Globalization thus brought new
economic opportunities and interconnections as well
as the potential for renewed economic insecurity.

970

