Conservative America
in the Ascent
1980–1991

The  decade  of  the  1970s  saw

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
What  factors  made  the  rise  of  the
New Right possible, and what ideas
about  freedom  and  citizenship  did
conservatives articulate in the 1980s?

Americans divided by the Vietnam
War, wearied by social unrest, and
unmoored by economic drift. As a result,
many  ordinary  citizens  developed  a  deep
distrust of the muscular Great Society lib-
eralism  of  the  1960s.  Seizing  political  advantage  amid  the  trauma  and  divisions,  a
revived Republican Party, led by the New Right, offered the nation a fresh way forward:
economic deregulation, low taxes, Christian morality, and a reenergized Cold War for-
eign  policy.  The  election  of  President  Ronald  Reagan  in  1980  symbolized  the  ascen-
dance of this new political formula, and the president himself helped shape the era.

The New Right revived conﬁdence in “free markets” and called for a smaller govern-
ment role in economic regulation and social welfare. Reagan famously said, “Govern-
ment is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem.” Like the New
Right  generally,  Reagan  was  profoundly  skeptical  of  the  liberal  ideology  that  had
informed American public policy since Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal. His presidency
combined  an  economically  conservative  domestic  agenda  with  aggressive  anticom-
munism  abroad.  Reagan’s  foreign  policy  brought  an  end  to  détente — a  lessening  of
tensions — with  the  Soviet  Union  (which  had  begun  with  Richard  Nixon)  and  then,
unexpectedly, a sudden thawing of U.S.-Soviet relations, laying the groundwork for the
end of the Cold War.

Reagan deﬁned the conservative ascendancy of the 1980s, but he did not create the
New Right groundswell that brought him into ofﬁce. Grassroots conservative activists in
the 1960s and 1970s built a formidable right-wing movement that awaited an oppor-
tune  political moment to challenge for national power. That moment came in 1980,
when Democratic president Jimmy Carter’s popularity plummeted as a result of his mis-
management  of  two  national  crises.  Raging  inﬂation  and  the  Iranian  seizure  of  U.S.
hostages  in  Tehran  undid  Carter  and  provided  an  opening  for  the  New  Right,  which
would shape the nation’s politics for the remainder of the twentieth century and the
ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst.

30

C H A P T E R

THE RISE OF THE
NEW RIGHT

Barry Goldwater and Ronald
Reagan: Champions of the
Right

Free-Market Economics and
Religious Conservatism

The Carter Presidency

THE DAWNING OF THE
CONSERVATIVE AGE
The Reagan Coalition

Conservatives in Power

Morning in America

THE END OF THE
COLD WAR

U.S.-Soviet Relations in a

New Era

A New Political Order at Home

and Abroad

972

