974

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

The Rise of the New Right
The  Great  Depression  and  World  War  II  discredited
the  traditional  conservative  program  of  limited  gov-
ernment at home and diplomatic isolationism abroad.
Nevertheless, a right-wing faction survived within the
Republican  Party.  Its  adherents  continued  to  oppose
the New Deal but reversed their earlier isolationism.
In  the  postwar  decades,  conservatives  pushed  for
military interventions against communism in Europe,
Asia,  and  the  developing  world  while  calling  for  the
broadest possible investigation of subversives at home
(Chapter 25).

However,  conservatives  failed  to  devise  policies
that  could  win  the  allegiance  of  American  voters  in
the  two  decades  after  World  War  II.  Republicans  by
and  large  continued  to  favor  party  moderates,  such
as  Dwight  Eisenhower,  Thomas  Dewey,  and  Nelson
Rockefeller. These were politicians, often called liberal
Republicans,  who  supported  much  of  the  New  Deal,
endorsed the containment policy overseas, and steered
a middle course through the volatile social and polit-
ical changes of the postwar era. The conservative fac-
tion held out hope, however, that it might one day win
the loyalty of a majority of Republicans and remake the
party in its image. In the 1960s and 1970s, these con-
servatives invested their hopes for national resurgence
in two dynamic figures: Barry Goldwater and Ronald
Reagan.  Together,  the  two  carried  the  conservative
banner until the national mood grew more receptive to
right-wing appeals.

Barry Goldwater and Ronald Reagan:
Champions of the Right
The personal odyssey of Ronald Reagan embodies the
story  of  New  Right  Republican  conservatism.  Before
World War II, Reagan was a well-known movie actor as
well as a New Deal Democrat and admirer of Roosevelt.
However, he turned away from liberalism, partly from
self-interest (he disliked paying high taxes) and partly
on principle. As head of the Screen Actors Guild from
1947  to  1952,  Reagan  had  to  deal  with  its  Commu-
nist  members,  who  formed  the
extreme left wing of the American
labor  movement.  Dismayed  by
their  hard-line  tactics  and  goals,
he  became  a  militant  anticomm-
unist.  After  nearly  a  decade  as  a
spokesperson for the General Elec-
tric  Corporation,  Reagan  joined

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
Why was the New Right
disappointed with the
Republican Party in the
decades after World
War II?

Barry Goldwater

Barry Goldwater was a three-term senator from Arizona
before he ran for the presidency in 1964 (this photo was
taken during the campaign). Goldwater’s conservative
inﬂuence on the Republican Party was considerable
and laid the political groundwork for the rise of Ronald
Reagan a decade and a half later. © Everett Collection
Inc./Alamy.

the  Repub lican  Party  in  the  early  1960s  and  began
speaking for conservative causes and candidates.

One  of  those  candidates  was  archconservative
Barry Goldwater, a Republican senator from Arizona.
Confident in their power, centrist Republicans did not
anticipate  that  grassroots  conservatives  could  chal-
lenge the party’s  old guard and nominate one of their
own for president: Goldwater himself. Understanding
how  they  did  so  in  1964  brings  us  closer  to  compre-
hending the forces that propelled Reagan to the presi-
dency  a  decade  and  a  half  later.  Indeed,  Reagan  the
politician  came  to  national  attention  in  1964  with  a
televised  speech  at  the  Republican  convention  sup-
porting  Goldwater  for  the  presidency.  In  a  dramatic
speech  titled  “A  Time  for  Choosing,”  Reagan  warned
that if we “trade our freedom for the soup kitchen of
the welfare state,” the nation would “take the first step
into a thousand years of darkness.”

The Conscience of a Conservative  Like  Reagan,
Goldwater  came  from  the  Sunbelt,  where  citizens

