CHAPTER 30

  Conservative America in the Ascent, 1980–1991

975

embraced  a  libertarian  spirit  of  limited  government
and great personal freedom. His 1960 book, The Con-
science of a Conservative, set forth an uncompromis-
ing  conservatism.  In  direct  and  accessible  prose,
Goldwater  attacked  the  New  Deal  state,  arguing  that
“the natural tendency of government [is] to expand in
the  direction  of  absolutism.”  The  problem  with  the
Republican Party, as he saw it, was that Eisenhower had
been too accommodating to liberalism. When Ike told
reporters that he was “liberal when it comes to human
problems,” Goldwater privately fumed.

The Conscience of a Conservative spurred a Repub-
lican grassroots movement in support of Goldwater. By
distributing his book widely and mobilizing activists at
state party conventions, conservatives hoped to create
such a groundswell of support that Goldwater could be
“drafted”  to  run  for  president  in  1964,  something  he
reportedly did not wish to do. Meanwhile, Goldwater
further  enchanted  conservatives  with  another  book,
Why Not Victory?, in which he criticized the contain-
ment policy — the strategy of preventing the spread of
communism followed by both Democrats and Repub-
licans since 1947 (Chapter 25). It was, he complained,
a  policy  of  “timidly  refusing  to  draw  our  own  lines
against aggression . . . unmarked by pride or the pros-
pect  of  victory.”  Here  was  a  politician  saying  exactly
what conservatives wanted to hear.

Grassroots Conservatives  Because moderates dom-
inated  the  Republican  Party  leadership,  winning  the
1964 nomination for Goldwater required conservative
activists to build their campaign from the bottom up.
They found thousands upon thousands of Americans
willing  to  wear  down  shoe  leather  for  their  political
hero.  Organizations  such  as  the  John  Birch  Society,
Young Americans for Freedom, and the Liberty Lobby
supplied an army of eager volunteers. They came from
such  conservative  strongholds  as  Orange  County,
California,  and  the  fast-growing  suburbs  of  Phoenix,
Dallas, Houston, Atlanta, and other Sunbelt metropo-
lises. A critical boost came in the early spring of 1964,
when  conservatives  outmaneuvered  moderates  at  the
state  convention  of  the  California  Republican  Party,
which  then  enthusiastically  endorsed  Goldwater.  The
fight had been bruising, and one moderate Republican
warned that “sinister forces are at work to take over the
whole Republican apparatus in California.”

Another spur to Goldwater backers was the appear-
ance  of  a  book  by  Phyllis  Schlafly,  who  was  then  a
relatively unknown conservative activist from the Mid-
west.  Like  Goldwater’s  own  book,  Schlafly’s  A  Choice
Not  an  Echo  accused  moderate  Republicans  of  being

Demo crats  in  disguise  (that  is,  an  “echo”  of  Demo-
crats).  Schlafly,  who  reappeared  in  the  national  spot-
light  in  the  early  1970s  to  help  halt  the  ratification
of  the  Equal  Rights  Amendment,  denounced  the
“Rockefeller Republicans” of the Northeast and encour-
aged  the  party  to  embrace  a  defiant  conservatism.
Contrasting Goldwater’s “grassroots Republicans” with
Rockefeller’s “kingmakers,” Schlafly hoped to “forestall
another defeat like 1940, 1944, 1948, and 1960,” Dem-
ocratic victories all.

The conservative groundswell won the Republican
nomination for Goldwater. However, his strident tone
and militarist foreign policy were too much for a nation
mourning the death of John F. Kennedy and still com-
mitted  to  liberalism.  Democrat  Lyndon  B.  Johnson
defeated  Goldwater  in  a  historic  landslide  (Chap-
ter  28).  Many  believed  that  Goldwater  conservatism
would wither and die, but instead the nearly four mil-
lion volunteers who had campaigned for the Arizona
senator  swung  their  support  to  Ronald  Reagan  and
built  toward  the  future.  Skilled  conservative  political
operatives such as Richard Viguerie, a Louisiana-born
Catholic  and  antiabortion  activist,  applied  new  com-
puter  technology  to  political  campaigning.  Viguerie
took a list of 12,000 Goldwater contributors and used
computerized  mailing  lists  to  solicit  campaign  funds,
rally support for conservative causes, and get out the vote
on election day. Conservatism was down but not out.

Backed financially by wealthy southern Californians
and  supported  by  Goldwaterites,  Reagan  won  Cali-
fornia’s  governorship  in  1966  and  again  in  1970.  His
impassioned  rhetoric  supporting  limited  government
and law and order — he vowed to “clean up the mess in
Berkeley,”  referring  to  campus  radicals — won  broad
support among citizens of the nation’s most populous
state. More significantly, it made him a force in national
politics. His supporters believed that he was in line to
succeed Nixon as the next Republican president. The
Watergate  scandal  intervened,  however,  discrediting
Nixon and making Gerald Ford the incumbent. After
narrowly  losing  a  campaign  against  Ford  for  the
Republican  presidential  nomination  in  1976,  Reagan
was forced to bide his time. When Ford lost to Carter
in  that  year’s  election,  as  the  party’s  brightest  star
Reagan was a near lock to be the nominee in 1980.

Free-Market Economics
and Religious Conservatism
The last phase of Reagan’s rise was the product of sev-
eral  additional  developments  within  the  New  Right.
The  burgeoning  conservative  movement  increasingly

