976

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
What was the “three-
legged stool” of the New
Right, and how did each
leg develop within the
context of the Cold War?

resembled  a  three-legged  stool.
Each  leg  represented  an  ideolog-
ical  position  and  a  popular  con-
stituency:  anticommunism,  free-
market  economics,  and  religious
traditionalism.  Uniting  all  three
in  a  political  coalition  was  no
easy feat. Religious traditionalists
demanded  strong  government  action  to  implement
their  faith-based  agenda,  while  economic  conserva-
tives  favored  limited  government  and  free  markets.
Both groups, however, were ardent anticommunists —
free marketeers loathed the state-directed Soviet econ-
omy, and religious conservatives despised the “godless”
secularism of the Soviet state. In the end, the success of
the New Right would come to depend on balancing the
interests of economic and moral conservatives.

Since  the  1950s,  William  F.  Buckley,  the  founder
and  editor  of  the  conservative  magazine  National
Review,  and  Milton  Friedman,  the  Nobel  Prize–
winning economist at the University of Chicago, had
been  the  most  prominent  conservative  intellectuals.
Con vinced  that  “the  growth  of  government  must  be
fought relentlessly,” Buckley used the National Review
to  criticize  liberal  policy.  For  his  part,  Friedman
became a national conservative icon with the publica-
tion  of  Capitalism  and  Freedom  (1962),  in  which  he
argued that “economic freedom is . . . an indispensable
means  toward  the  achievement  of  political  freedom.”
Friedman’s  free-market  ideology,  along  with  that  of
Friedrich  von  Hayek,  another  University  of  Chicago
economist,  was  taken  up  by  wealthy  conservatives,
who funded think tanks during the 1980s to dissemi-
nate  market-based  public  policy  ideas.  The  Heritage
Foundation, the American Enterprise Institute, and the
Cato Institute issued policy proposals and attacked lib-
eral legislation and the stranglehold of economic regu-
lation  they  believed  it  exerted.  Followers  of  Buckley
and  Friedman  envisioned  themselves  as  crusaders,
working against what one conservative called “the des-
potic aspects of egalitarianism.”

The  most  striking  addition  to  the  conservative
coalition was the Religious Right. Until the 1970s, pol-
itics  was  an  earthly  concern  of  secondary  interest  to
most  fundamentalist  and  evangelical  Protestants.  But
the  perception  that  American  society  had  become
immoral, combined with the influence of a new gener-
ation  of  popular  ministers,  made  politics  relevant.
Conservative Protestants and Catholics joined together
in  a  tentative  alliance,  as  the  Religious  Right  con-
demned  divorce,  abortion,  premarital  sex,  and  femi-
nism. The route to a moral life and to “peace, pardon,

purpose,  and  power,”  as  one  evangelical  activist  said,
was  “to  plug  yourself  into  the  One,  the  Only  One
[God].”

Charismatic  televangelists  such  as  Pat  Robertson
and  Jerry  Falwell  emerged  as  the  champions  of  a
morality-based political agenda during the late 1970s.
Falwell, founder of Liberty University and host of the
Old Time Gospel Hour television program, established
the  Moral  Majority  in  1979.  With  400,000  members
and  $1.5  million  in  contributions  in  its  first  year,  it
would  be  the  organizational  vehicle  for  transforming
the Fourth Great Awakening into a religious political
movement. Falwell made no secret of his views: “If you
want to know where I am politically,” he told reporters,
“I thought Goldwater was too liberal.” Falwell was not
alone.  Phyllis  Schlafly’s  STOP  ERA,  which  became
Eagle Forum in 1975, continued to advocate for con-
servative  public  policy;  Focus  on  the  Family  was

Jerry Falwell

The resurgence of evangelical religion in the 1970s was
accompanied by a conservative movement in politics known
as the Religious Right. Founded in 1979 by televangelist Jerry
Falwell, the Moral Majority was one of the earliest Religious
Right groups, committed to promoting “family values” and
(as the title to the record album he is holding in this photo
suggests) patriotism in American society and politics. Wally
McNamee/Corbis.

