CHAPTER 30

  Conservative America in the Ascent, 1980–1991

977

founded  in  1977;  and  a  succession  of  conservative
organizations  would  emerge  in  the  1980s,  including
the Family Research Council.

The  conservative  message  preached  by  Barry
Goldwater  and  Ronald  Reagan  had  appealed  to  few
American  voters  in  1964.  Then  came  the  series  of
events that undermined support for the liberal agenda
of the Democratic Party: the failed war in Vietnam; a
judiciary  that  legalized  abortion  and  pornography,
enforced  school  busing,  and  curtailed  public  expres-
sion of religion; urban riots; and a stagnating economy.
By the late 1970s, the New Right had developed a con-
servative message that commanded much greater pop-
ular support than Goldwater’s program had. Religious
and free-market conservatives joined with traditional
anticommunist hard-liners — alongside whites opposed
to black civil rights, affirmative action, and busing — in
a broad coalition that attacked welfare-state liberalism,
social permissiveness, and an allegedly weak and defen-
sive foreign policy. Ronald Reagan expertly appealed to
all  of  these  conservative  constituencies  and  captured
the Republican presidential nomination in 1980 (Amer-
ican Voices, p. 978). It had taken almost two decades,
but the New Right appeared on the verge of winning
the presidency.

The Carter Presidency
First,  the  Republican  Party  had  to  defeat  incumbent
president Jimmy Carter. Carter’s outsider status and his
disdain for professional politicians had made him the
ideal post-Watergate president. But his ineffectiveness
and missteps as an executive also made him the perfect
foil for Ronald Reagan.

Carter had an idealistic vision of American leader-
ship in world affairs. He presented himself as the anti-
Nixon, a world leader who rejected Henry Kissinger’s
“realism” in favor of human rights and peacemaking.
“Human rights is the soul of our foreign policy,” Carter
asserted, “because human rights is the very soul of our
sense  of  nationhood.”  He  established  the  Office  of
Human Rights in the State Department and withdrew
economic and military aid from repressive regimes in
Argentina, Uruguay, and Ethiopia — although, in real-
ist fashion, he still funded equally repressive U.S. allies
such as the Philippines, South Africa, and Iran. In Latin
America,  Carter  eliminated  a  decades-old  symbol  of
Yankee  imperialism  by  signing  a  treaty  on  Septem-
ber 7, 1977, turning control of the Panama Canal over
to  Panama  (effective  December  31,  1999).  Carter’s
most  important  efforts  came  in  forging  an  enduring,
although in retrospect limited, peace in the intractable

Arab-Israeli conflict. In 1978, he invited Israeli prime
minister  Menachem  Begin  and  Egyptian  president
Anwar el-Sadat to Camp David, where they crafted a
“framework for peace,” under which Egypt recognized
Israel  and  received  back  the  Sinai  Peninsula,  which
Israel had occupied since 1967.

Carter deplored what he called the “inordinate fear
of communism,” but his efforts at improving relations
with the Soviet Union foundered. His criticism of the
Kremlin’s  record  on  human  rights  offended  Soviet
leader  Leonid  Brezhnev  and  slowed  arms  reduction
negotiations. When, in 1979, Carter finally signed the
second  Strategic  Arms  Limitations  Treaty  (SALT  II),
limiting bombers and missiles, Senate hawks objected.
Then, when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan that
December, Carter suddenly endorsed the hawks’ posi-
tion and treated the invasion as the “gravest threat to
world  peace  since  World  War  II.”  After  ordering  an
embargo on wheat shipments to the Soviet Union and
withdrawing SALT II from Senate consideration, Carter
called  for  increased  defense  spending  and  declared
an  American  boycott  of  the  1980  Summer  Olympics
in  Moscow.  In  a  fateful  decision,  he  and  Congress
began providing covert assistance to anti-Soviet fight-
ers in Afghanistan, some of whom, including Osama
bin Laden, would metamorphose into anti-American
Islamic radicals decades later.

Hostage  Crisis  Carter’s  ultimate  undoing  came  in
Iran, however. The United States had long counted Iran
as  a  faithful  ally,  a  bulwark  against  Soviet  expansion
into the Middle East and a steady source of oil. Since
the  1940s,  Iran  had  been  ruled  by  Mohammad  Reza
Shah Pahlavi. Ousted by a democratically elected par-
liament in the early 1950s, the shah (king) sought and
received the assistance of the U.S. Central Intelligence
Agency  (CIA),  which  helped  him  reclaim  power  in
1953. American intervention soured Iranian views of
the United States for decades. Early in 1979, a revolu-
tion drove the shah into exile and brought a fundamen-
talist  Shiite  cleric,  the  Ayatollah  Ruhollah  Khomeini,
to power (Shiites represent one branch of Islam, Sun-
nis  the  other).  When  the  United  States  admitted  the
deposed  shah  into  the  country  for  cancer  treatment,
Iranian  students  seized  the  U.S.  embassy  in  Tehran,
taking  sixty-six  Americans  hostage.  The  captors
demanded that the shah be returned to Iran for trial.
Carter  refused.  Instead,  he  suspended  arms  sales  to
Iran and froze Iranian assets in American banks.

For  the  next  fourteen  months,  the  hostage  crisis
paralyzed Carter’s presidency. Night after night, humil-
iating  pictures  of  blindfolded  American  hostages

