A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Christianity and

Public Life

Modern  social-welfare  liberalism  embodies  an  ethic  of  moral  pluralism  and
favors the separation of church and state. Conservative Christians challenge the
legitimacy of pluralism and secularism and seek, through political agitation and
legal action, to make religion an integral part of public life.

President Ronald Reagan
“The Rule of Law Under God”

Donald E. Wildmon
Network Television as a Moral Danger

Reagan’s  candidacy  was  strongly  supported  by  Christian
conservatives. He delivered these remarks to the National
Association of American Evangelicals in 1983.

I want you to know that this administration is motivated
by a political philosophy that sees the greatness of America
in you, her people, and in your families, churches, neigh-
borhoods, communities — the institutions that foster and
nourish values like concern for others and respect for the
rule of law under God.

Now, I don’t have to tell you that this puts us in oppo-
sition to, or at least out of step with, a prevailing attitude
of many who have turned to a modern-day secularism,
discarding the tried and time-tested values upon which
our very civilization is based. No matter how well inten-
tioned, their value system is radically different from that
of most Americans. And while they proclaim that they’re
freeing us from superstitions of the past, they’ve taken
upon themselves the job of superintending us by gov-
ernment rule and regulation. Sometimes their voices
are louder than ours, but they are not yet a majority. . . .
Freedom prospers when religion is vibrant and the

rule of law under God is acknowledged. When our
Founding Fathers passed the First Amendment, they
sought to protect churches from government interfer-
ence. They never intended to construct a wall of hostility
between government and the concept of religious belief
itself.

Last year, I sent the Congress a constitutional amend-

ment to restore prayer to public schools. Already this
session, there’s growing bipartisan support for the
amendment, and I am calling on the Congress to
act speedily to pass it and to let our children pray.

Source: Reprinted with the permission of Simon & Schuster, Inc. from Speaking My
Mind by Ronald Reagan. Copyright © 1989 Ronald W. Reagan.

978

Wildmon was a Christian minister, a grassroots religious activ-
ist, and the founder of the American Family Association.

One night during the Christmas holidays of 1976, I
decided to watch television with my family. . . . Not far
into the program was a scene of adultery. I reacted to the
situation in the manner as I had been taught. I asked one
of the children to change channels. Getting involved in
the second program, we were shocked with some crude
profanity. . . .

As I sat in my den that night, I became angry. I had
been disturbed by the deterioration of morals I had wit-
nessed in the media and society during the previous
twenty-five years.

This was accompanied by a dramatic rise in crime, a
proliferation of pornography, increasingly explicit sexual
lyrics in music, increasing numbers of broken homes, a
rise in drug and alcohol use among the youth, and vari-
ous other negative factors. . . .

Realizing that these changes were being brought into
the sanctity of my home, I decided I could and would no
longer remain silent. . . .

This great struggle is one of values, particularly which

ones will be the standard for our society and a base for
our system of justice in the years to come. For 200 years
our country has based its morals, its sense of right and
wrong, on the Christian view of man. The Ten Com-
mand ments and the Sermon on the Mount have been
our solid foundation. . . .

Television is the most pervasive and persuasive
medium we have. At times it is larger than life. It is our
only true national medium. Network television is the
greatest educator we have. . . .

It is teaching that adultery is an acceptable and
approved lifestyle. . . . It is teaching that hardly anyone
goes to church, that very few people in our society are
Christian or live by Christian principles. How? By simply
censoring Christian characters, Christian values, and
Christian culture from the programs.

Source: From Donald E. Wildmon, Home Invaders (Elgin, IL: Victor Books, 1985).
Copyright © 1985. Reprinted by permission of the author.

