A. Bartlett Giamatti
The Moral Majority as a Threat to Liberty

A.  Bartlett  Giamatti  was  the  president  of  Yale  University
(1978–1986)  and  subsequently  commissioner  of  Major
League Baseball. He offered these remarks to the entering
class of Yale undergraduates in 1981.

A self-proclaimed “Moral Majority,” and its satellite or
client groups, cunning in the use of a native blend of old
intimidation and new technology, threaten the values [of
pluralism and freedom]. . . .

From the maw of this “morality” come those who
presume to know what justice for all is; come those who
presume to know which books are fit to read, which tele-
vision programs are fit to watch. . . . From the maw of this
“morality” rise the tax-exempt Savonarolas who believe
they, and they alone, possess the “truth.” There is no
debate, no discussion, no dissent. They know. . . .
What nonsense.

What dangerous, malicious nonsense. . . .
We should be concerned that so much of our political
and religious leadership acts intimidated for the moment
and will not say with clarity that this most recent denial
of the legitimacy of differentness is a radical assault on
the very pluralism of peoples, political beliefs, values,
forms of merit and systems of religion our country was
founded to welcome and foster.

Liberty protects the person from unwarranted govern-
ment intrusions into a dwelling or other private places. In
our tradition the State is not omnipresent in the home.
And there are other spheres of our lives and existence,
outside the home, where the State should not be a domi-
nant presence.

Freedom extends beyond spatial bounds. Liberty
presumes an autonomy of self that includes freedom of
thought, belief, expression, and certain intimate conduct.

Source: From Speeches and Articles by and about Presidents of Yale University (RU 65).
Manuscripts and Archives, Yale University Library. Used by permission of Manuscripts
and Archives, Yale University Library.

Anthony Kennedy
The Constitution Protects Privacy

Kennedy,  a  Roman  Catholic,  was  named  to  the  Supreme
Court  by  Ronald  Reagan  in  1988.  In  Lawrence  v.  Texas
(2003), which challenged a state antisodomy law, he wrote
the  opinion  for  ﬁve  of  the  six  justices  in  the  majority;
Sandra Day O’Connor wrote a concurring opinion.

The question before the Court is the validity of a Texas
statute making it a crime for two persons of the same sex
to engage in certain intimate sexual conduct.

In Houston, Texas, officers of the Harris County
Police Department were dispatched to a private resi-
dence in response to a reported weapons disturbance.
They entered an apartment where one of the petitioners,
John Geddes Lawrence, resided. . . . The officers observed
Lawrence and another man, Tyron Garner, engaging in a
sexual act. The two petitioners were arrested, held in cus-
tody over night, and charged and convicted before a
Justice of the Peace.

The complaints described their crime as “deviate sex-
ual intercourse, namely [ . . . ] sex, with a member of the
same sex (man).” . . .

We conclude the case should be resolved by determin-
ing whether the petitioners were free as adults to engage
in the private conduct in the exercise of their liberty
under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment to the Constitution.

[The Texas statute in question seeks] to control a per-
sonal relationship that, whether or not entitled to formal
recognition in the law, is within the liberty of persons to
choose without being punished as criminals. . . . The lib-
erty protected by the Constitution allows homosexual
persons the right to make this choice. . . .

. . . The petitioners are entitled to respect for their
private lives. The State cannot demean their existence or
control their destiny by making their private sexual con-
duct a crime. Their right to liberty under the Due Process
Clause gives them the full right to engage in their conduct
without intervention of the government. “It is a promise
of the Constitution that there is a realm of personal lib-
erty which the government may not enter.”

Source: Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, 562–563, 567, 571, 579 (2003).

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Compare the Ronald Reagan and Anthony Kennedy

documents. What would Reagan think of the opinion
written by Justice Kennedy, his appointee? Given his
condemnation of those intent on “subordinating us
to government rule and regulation,” do you think he
would agree with it? Why or why not?

2.  According to Wildmon, what should be shown on televi-
sion, and who should make those decisions? How would
Giamatti answer that same question?

3.  Consider the different points of view presented here.
According to these sources, when should the govern-
ment police private conduct?

979

