980

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

American Hostages in Iran

Images of blindfolded, handcuffed American
hostages seized by Iranian militants at the U.S.
embassy in Tehran in November 1979 shocked
the nation and created a foreign policy crisis that
eventually cost President Carter his chance for
reelection. Alain Mingam/Gamma/Zuma Press.

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
In terms of presidential
politics and policy, how
successful was Jimmy
Carter’s term, coming
between two Republicans
(Nixon and Reagan)?

appeared on television newscasts.
An  attempt  to  mount  a  military
rescue  in  April  1980  had  to  be
aborted  because  of  equipment
failures  in  the  desert.  Several
months later, however, a stunning
development  changed  the  calcu-
lus  on  both  sides:  Iraq,  led  by
Saddam  Hussein,  invaded  Iran,
officially  because  of  a  dispute  over  deep-water  ports
but  also  to  prevent  the  Shiite-led  Iranian  Revolution
from spreading across the border into Sunni-run Iraq.
Desperate to focus his nation’s attention on Iraq’s inva-
sion,  Khomeini  began  to  talk  with  the  United  States
about  releasing  the  hostages.  Difficult  negotiations
dragged on past the American presidential election in
November 1980, and the hostages were finally released
the day after Carter left office — a final indignity endured
by a well-intentioned but ineffectual president.

The  Election  of  1980  President  Carter’s  sink-
ing  popularity  hurt  his  bid  for  reelection.  When  the
Demo crats  barely  renominated  him  over  his  liberal
challenger, Edward (Ted) Kennedy of Massachusetts,
Carter’s  approval  rating  was  historically  low:  a  mere
21 percent of Americans believed that he was an effec-
tive  president.  The  reasons  were  clear.  Economically,
millions of citizens were feeling the pinch from stag-
nant  wages,  high  inflation,  crippling  mortgage  rates,

and  an  unemployment  rate  of  nearly  8  percent.  In
international affairs, the nation blamed Carter for his
weak  response  to  Soviet  expansion  and  the  Iranians’
seizure of American diplomats.

With  Carter  on  the  defensive,  Reagan  remained
upbeat  and  decisive.  “This  is  the  greatest  country  in
the world,” Reagan reassured the nation in his warm
baritone  voice.  “We  have  the  talent,  we  have  the
drive. . . . All we need is the leadership.” To emphasize
his intention to be a formidable international leader,
Reagan hinted that he would take strong action to win
the hostages’ return. To signal his rejection of liberal
policies,  he  declared  his  opposition  to  affirmative
action  and  forced  busing  and  promised  to  “get  the
government  off  our  backs.”  Most  important,  Reagan
effectively appealed to the many Americans who felt
financially insecure. In a televised debate with Carter,
Reagan  emphasized  the  hardships  facing  working-
and  middle-class  Americans  in  an  era  of  stagflation
and  asked  them:  “Are  you  better  off  today  than  you
were four years ago?”

In November, the voters gave a clear answer. They
repudiated Carter, giving him only 41.0 percent of the
vote. Independent candidate John Anderson garnered
6.6  percent  (with  a  few  minor  candidates  receiving
fractions of a percent), and Reagan won with 50.7 per-
cent  of  the  popular  vote  (Map  30.1).  Moreover,  the
Republicans elected thirty-three new members of the
House  of  Representatives  and  twelve  new  senators,

