CHAPTER 30

  Conservative America in the Ascent, 1980–1991

981

9

6

4

4

3

3

4

45

7

6

4

3

4

43

14

4
8
17
3
10

41

27

12

13

11

21

26 13

25

6

9

10

8

12

7

9

17

3 Washington, D.C.

3

4

5

10

8

7

8

26

12

6

10

4

Candidate

Ronald Reagan
(Republican)

Jimmy Carter
(Democrat)

John B. Anderson
(Independent)

Minor parties

Electoral
Vote

Popular
Vote

Percent of
Popular Vote

489

43,899,248

50.7

49

35,481,435

41.0

5,719,437

6.6

1,395,558

MAP 30.1
The Presidential Election of 1980

Ronald Reagan easily defeated Democratic incumbent
Jimmy Carter, taking 50.7 percent of the popular vote
to Carter’s 41.0 percent and winning the electoral vote
in all but six states and the District of Columbia. Reagan
cut deeply into the traditional Democratic coalition
by wooing many southern whites, urban ethnics, and
blue-collar workers. More than ﬁve million Americans
expressed their discontent with Carter’s ineffectiveness
and Reagan’s conservatism by voting for Independent
candidate John Anderson, a longtime Republican
member of the House of Representatives.

which gave them control of the U.S. Senate for the first
time since 1954. The New Right’s long road to national
power had culminated in an election victory that sig-
naled a new political alignment in the country.

The Dawning of the
Conservative Age
By the time Ronald Reagan took office in 1981, conser-
vatism commanded wider popular support than at any
time  since  the  1920s.  As  the  New  Deal  Democratic
coalition continued to fragment, the Republican Party
accelerated the realignment of the American electorate
that had begun during the 1960s. Conservatism’s ascen-
d ancy did more than realign the nation politically. Its
emphasis  on  free  markets,  low  taxes,  and  individual
success  shaped  the  nation’s  culture  and  inaugurated
a  conservative  era.  Reagan  exhorted  Americans,  “Let

the men and women of the marketplace decide what
they want.”

The Reagan Coalition
Reagan’s  decades  in  public  life,  especially  his  years
working  for  General  Electric,  had  equipped  him  to
articulate  conservative  ideas  in  easily  understandable
aphorisms.  Speaking  against  the  growing  size  and
influence of government, Reagan said, “Concentrated
power has always been the enemy of liberty.” Under his
leadership, the core of the Republican Party remained
the  relatively  affluent,  white,  Protestant  voters  who
supported  balanced  budgets,  opposed  government
activism, feared communism, and believed in a strong
national defense. Reagan Republicanism also attracted
middle-class suburbanites and migrants to the Sunbelt
states who endorsed the conservative agenda of com-
bating  crime  and  limiting  social-welfare  spending.
Suburban  growth  in  particular,  a  phenomenon  that
reshaped metropolitan areas across the country in the
1960s  and  1970s,  benefitted  conservatives  politically.
Suburban traditions of privatization and racial homo-
geneity, combined with the amenities of middle-class
comfort,  made  the  residents  of  suburban  cities  more
inclined to support conservative public policies.

This  emerging  Reagan  coalition  was  joined  by  a
large  and  electorally  key  group  of  former  Democrats
that had been gradually moving toward the Republican
Party since 1964: southern whites. Reagan capitalized
on  the  “southern  strategy”  developed  by  Richard
Nixon’s  advisors  in  the  late  1960s.  Many  southern
whites had lost confidence in the Democratic Party for
a wide range of reasons, but one factor stood out: the
party’s support for civil rights. When Reagan came to
Philadelphia,  Miss issippi,  to  deliver  his  first  official
speech  as  the  Republican  presidential  nominee,  his
ringing endorsement of “states’ rights” sent a clear mes-
sage: he validated twenty-five years of southern oppo-
sition to federal civil rights legislation. Some of Reagan’s
advisors had warned him not to go to Phila delphia, the
site of the tragic murder of three civil rights workers in
1964,  but  Reagan  believed  the  opportunity  to  launch
his campaign on a “states’ rights”
note  too  important.  After  1980,
southern  whites  would  remain  a
cornerstone  of  the  Repub lican
coalition.

The  Religious  Right  proved
crucial to the Repub lican victory
as  well.  Falwell’s  Moral  Majority
claimed  that  it  had  registered

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
What different constituen-
cies made up the Reagan
coalition, and how would
you characterize their
regional, geographic, class,
and racial composition?

