982

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

President Reagan at His Ranch in
Southern California

Images of Reagan quickly became vital for the
White House to deliver its message of conserva-
tive reform to the American people. This photo
was taken by a White House photographer.
Ronald Reagan Presidential Library.

two million new voters for the 1980 election, and the
Republican  Party’s  platform  reflected  its  influence.
That platform called for a constitutional ban on abor-
tion, voluntary prayer in public schools, and a manda-
tory  death  penalty  for  certain  crimes.  Repub licans
also  demanded  an  end  to  court-mandated  busing  to
achieve racial integration in schools, and, for the first
time in forty years, opposed the Equal Rights Amend-
ment. Within the Republican Party, conservatism had
triumphed.

Reagan’s broad coalition attracted the allegiance of
another group dissatisfied with the direction of liberal-
ism in the 1970s: blue-collar voters, a high number of
Catholics among them, alarmed by antiwar protesters
and rising welfare expenditures and hostile to feminist
demands. Some observers saw these voters, which many
called  Reagan  Democrats, as coming from the “silent
majority”  that  Nixon  had  swung  into  the  Republican
fold in 1968 and 1972. They lived in heavily industrial-
ized  midwestern  states  such  as  Michigan,  Ohio,  and
Illinois  and  had  been  a  core  part  of  the  Democratic
coalition  for  three  decades.  Reagan’s  victory  in  the
1980s  thus  hinged  on  both  a  revival  of  right-wing
conservative  activism  and  broad  dissatisfaction  with
liberal  Democrats — a  dissatisfaction  that  had  been
building  since  1968  but  had  been  interrupted  by  the
post-Watergate backlash against the Republican Party.

Conservatives in Power
The new president kept his political message clear and
simple. “What I want to see above all,” he remarked, “is
that  this  country  remains  a  country  where  someone
can  always  get  rich.”  Standing  in  the  way,  Reagan
believed,  was  government.  In  his  first  year  in  office,
Reagan  and  his  chief  advisor,  James  A.  Baker  III,
quickly set  new governmental priorities. To roll back
the  expanded  liberal  state,  they  launched  a  three-
pronged assault on federal taxes, social-welfare spend-
ing, and the regulatory bureaucracy. To prosecute the
Cold  War,  they  advocated  a  vast  increase  in  defense
spending and an end to détente with the Soviet Union.
And  to  match  the  resurgent  economies  of  Germany
and Japan, they set out to restore American leadership
of the world’s capitalist societies and to inspire renewed
faith in “free markets.”

Reaganomics  To  achieve  its  economic  objectives,
the  new  administration  advanced  a  set  of  policies,
quickly dubbed Reaganomics, to increase the produc-
tion (and thus the supply) of goods. The theory under-
lying  supply-side  economics,  as  this  approach  was
called,  emphasized  investment  in  productive  enter-
prises. According to supply-side theorists, the best way
to bolster investment was to reduce the taxes paid by

