CHAPTER 30

  Conservative America in the Ascent, 1980–1991

983

corporations and wealthy Americans, who could then
use these funds to expand production.

Supply-siders  maintained  that  the  resulting  eco-
nomic expansion would increase government revenues
and  offset  the  loss  of  tax  dollars  stemming  from  the
original  tax  cuts.  Meanwhile,  the  increasing  supply
would generate its own demand, as consumers stepped
forward  to  buy  ever  more  goods.  Supply-side  theory
presumed — in  fact,  gambled — that  future  tax  reve-
nues would make up for present tax cuts. The idea had
a growing list of supporters in Congress, led by an ex-
professional  football  player  from  Buffalo  named  Jack
Kemp.  Kemp  praised  supply-side  economics  as  “an
alternative to the slow-growth, recession-oriented pol-
icies of the [Carter] administration.”

Reagan  took  advantage  of  Republican  control  of
the Senate, as well as high-profile allies such as Kemp,
to  win  congressional  approval  of  the  1981  Economic
Recovery  Tax  Act  (ERTA),  a  massive  tax  cut  that
embodied  supply-side  principles.  The  act  reduced
income  tax  rates  for  most  Americans  by  23  percent
over three years. For the wealthiest Americans — those
with millions to invest — the highest marginal tax rate
dropped  from  70  to  50  percent.  The  act  also  slashed
estate taxes, levies on inheritances instituted during the
Progressive  Era  to  prevent  the  transmission  of  huge
fortunes from one generation to the next. Finally, the
new  legislation  trimmed  the  taxes  paid  by  business
corporations by $150 billion over a period of five years.
As a result of ERTA, by 1986 the annual revenue of the
federal  government  had  been  cut  by  $200  billion
(nearly half a trillion in 2010 dollars).

David Stockman, Reagan’s budget director, hoped
to match this reduction in tax revenue with a compa-
rable  cutback  in  federal  expenditures.  To  meet  this
ambitious goal, he proposed substantial cuts in Social
Security  and  Medicare.  But  Congress,  and  even  the
president himself, rejected his idea; they were not will-
ing to antagonize middle-class and elderly voters who
viewed  these  government  entitlements  as  sacred.  As
conservative  columnist  George  Will  noted  ironically,
“Americans are conservative. What they want to con-
serve is the New Deal.” After defense spending, Social
Security and Medicare were by far the nation’s largest
budget items; reductions in other programs would not
achieve  the  savings  the  administration  desired.  This
contradiction between New Right Republican ideology
and  political  reality  would  continue  to  frustrate  the
party into the twenty-first century.

A  more  immediate  embarrassment  confronted
conservatives,  however.  In  a  1982  Atlantic  article,
Stockman admitted that supply-side theory was based

on faith, not economics. To produce optimistic projec-
tions of higher tax revenue in future years, Stockman
had manipulated the figures. Worse, Stockman told the
Atlantic reporter candidly that supply-side theory was
based  on  a  long-discredited  idea:  the  “trickle-down”
notion that  helping the rich would eventually benefit
the  lower  and  middle  classes.  Stockman  had  drawn
back the curtain, much to Republicans’ consternation,
on  the  flawed  reasoning  of  supply-side  theory.  But  it
was too late. The plan had passed Congress, and since
Stockman could not cut major programs such as Social
Security and Medicare, he had few options to balance
the budget.

As the administration’s spending cuts fell short, the
federal budget deficit increased dramatically. Military
spending  contributed  a  large  share  of  the  growing
national  debt.  But  President  Reagan  remained
undaunted. “Defense is not a budget item,” he declared.
“You spend what you need.” To “make America num-
ber one again,” Reagan and Defense Secretary Caspar
Weinberger pushed through Congress a five-year, $1.2
trillion  military  spending  program  in  1981.  During
Reagan’s  presidency,  military  spending  accounted  for
one-fourth of all federal expenditures and contributed
to rising annual budget deficits (the amount overspent
by the government in a single year) and a skyrocketing
national debt (the cumulative total of all budget defi-
cits).  By  the  time  Reagan  left  office,  the  total  federal
debt  had  tripled,  rising  from  $930  billion  in  1981  to
$2.8 trillion in 1989. The rising annual deficits of the
1980s contradicted Reagan’s pledge of fiscal conserva-
tism (Figure 30.1).

Deregulation  Advocates  of  Reaganomics  asserted
that excessive regulation by federal agencies impeded
economic growth. Deregulation of prices in the truck-
ing,  airline,  and  railroad  industries  had  begun under
President Carter in the late 1970s, but Reagan expanded
the  mandate  to  include  cutting  back  on  government
protections  of  consumers,  workers,  and  the  environ-
ment. Some of the targeted federal bureaucracies, such
as the U.S. Department of Labor, had risen to promi-
nence  during  the  New  Deal;  others,  such  as  the
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration
(OSHA)  and  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency
(EPA), had been created during the Johnson and Nixon
administrations.  Although  these  agencies  provided
many  services  to  business  corporations,  they  also
increased  their  costs — by  protecting  the  rights  of
workers, mandating safety improvements in factories,
and requiring expensive equipment to limit the release
of toxic chemicals into the environment. To reduce the

