984

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

600

400

200

0

-200

-400

-600

-800

(in billions)

Clinton

World War II

R. Reagan and
G. H. W. Bush

G. W.
Bush

-1,000

-1,200

-1,400

1940

1945

1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2009

FIGURE 30.1
The Annual Federal Budget Deficit
(or Surplus), 1940–2009

During World War II, the federal govern-
ment incurred an enormous budget deﬁcit.
But between 1946 and 1965, it ran either
an annual budget surplus or incurred a
relatively small debt. The annual deﬁcits
rose signiﬁcantly during the Vietnam War
and the stagﬂation of the 1970s, but they
really exploded between 1982 and 1994,
in the budgets devised by the Ronald
Reagan and George H. W. Bush adminis-
trations, and again between 2002 and
2005, in those prepared by George W.
Bush. The Republican presidents increased
military spending while cutting taxes, an
enjoy-it-now philosophy that transferred
costs to future generations of Americans.

reach of federal regulatory agencies, the Reagan admin-
istration  in  1981  cut  their  budgets,  by  an  average  of
12 percent.

Reagan also rendered regulatory agencies less effec-
tive by staffing them with leaders who were opposed to
the agencies’ missions. James Watt, an outspoken con-
servative who headed the Department of the Interior,
attacked environmentalism as “a left-wing cult.” Acting
on  his  free-enterprise  principles,  Watt  opened  public
lands for use by private businesses — oil and coal cor-
porations, large-scale ranchers, and timber companies.
Anne  Gorsuch  Burford,  whom  Reagan  appointed  to
head  the  EPA,  likewise  disparaged  environmentalists
and  refused  to  cooperate  with  Congress  to  clean  up
toxic  waste  sites  under  a  program  known  as  the
Superfund. The Sierra Club and other environmental
groups  aroused  enough  public  outrage  about  these
appointees  that  the  administration  changed  its  posi-
tion. During President Reagan’s second term, he signif-
icantly increased the EPA’s budget and added acreage
to  the  National  Wilderness  Preservation  System  and
animals and plants to the endangered species lists.

Ultimately,  as  these  adjustments  demonstrate,
politics in the United States remained “the art of the
possible.” Savvy politicians know when to advance and
when  to  retreat.  Having  attained  two  of  his  prime
goals — a major tax cut and a dra-
matic increase in defense spend-
ing — Reagan  did  not  seriously
attempt to scale back big govern-
ment and the welfare state. When
he  left  office  in  1989,  federal
spending stood at 22.1 percent of

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
Why was Reagan unable
to reduce federal expendi-
tures as much as many of
his supporters had hoped?

the gross domestic product (GDP) and federal taxes at
19 percent of GDP, both virtually the same as in 1981.
In the meantime, though, the federal debt had tripled
in  size,  and  the  number  of  government  workers  had
increased  from  2.9  to  3.1  million.  This  outcome —
because  it  cut  against  the  president’s  rhetoric  about
balancing  budgets  and  downsizing  government —
elicited harsh criticism from some conservative com-
mentators.  “There  was  no  Reagan  Revolution,”  one
conservative  noted.  A  former  Reagan  aide  offered  a
more  balanced  assessment:  “Ronald  Reagan  did  far
less  than  he  had  hoped . . . and  a  hell  of  a  lot  more
than people thought he would.”

Remaking the Judiciary  Even if he did not achieve
everything many of his supporters desired, Reagan left
an  indelible  imprint  on  politics,  public  policy,  and
American  culture.  One  place  this  imprint  was  felt  in
far-reaching ways was the judiciary, where Reagan and
his attorney general, Edwin Meese, aimed at reversing
the liberal judicial philosophy that had prevailed since
the late 1950s. During his two terms, Reagan appointed
368 federal court judges — most of them with conser-
vative credentials — and three Supreme Court justices:
Sandra Day O’Connor (1981), Antonin Scalia (1986),
and  Anthony  Kennedy  (1988).  Ironically,  O’Connor
and Kennedy turned out to be far less devoted to New
Right  conservatism  than  Reagan  and  his  supporters
imagined. O’Connor, the first woman to serve on the
Court,  shaped  its  decision  making  as  a  swing  vote
between  liberals  and  conservatives.  Kennedy  also
emerged  as  a  judicial  moderate,  leaving  Scalia  as
Reagan’s only genuinely conservative appointee.

