CHAPTER 30

  Conservative America in the Ascent, 1980–1991

985

HIV/AIDS  Another conservative legacy was the slow
national response to one of the worst disease epidemics
of the postwar decades. The human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV), a deadly (though slow-acting) pathogen,
developed in Africa when a chimpanzee virus jumped
to humans; immigrants carried it to Haiti and then to
the United States during the 1970s. In 1981, American
physicians  identified  HIV  as  a  new  virus — one  that
caused a disease known as acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome  (AIDS).  Hundreds  of  gay  men,  who  were
prominent  among  the  earliest  carriers  of  the  virus,
were  dying  of  AIDS.  Within  two  decades,  HIV/AIDS
had spread worldwide, infected more than 50 million
people of both sexes, and killed more than 20 million.
Within the United States, AIDS took nearly a hun-
dred thousand lives in the 1980s — more than were lost
in the Korean and Vietnam Wars combined. However,
because  its  most  prominent  early  victims  were  gay
men,  President  Reagan,  emboldened  by  New  Right
conservatives, hesitated in declaring a national health
emergency.  Some  of  Reagan’s  advisors  asserted  that
this “gay disease” might even be God’s punishment of
homosexuals. Between 1981 and 1986, as the epidemic
spread, the Reagan administration took little action —
worse,  it  prevented  the  surgeon  general,  C.  Everett
Koop, from speaking forthrightly to the nation about
the  disease.  Pressed  by  gay  activists  and  prominent
health officials from across the country, in Reagan’s last
years in office the administration finally began to devote
federal  resources  to  treatment  for  HIV  and  AIDS
patients  and  research  into  possible  vaccines.  But  the
delay had proved costly, inhumane, and embarrassing.

Morning in America
During his first run for governor of California in 1966,
Reagan held a revelatory conversation with a campaign
consultant.  “Politics  is  just  like  the  movies,”  Reagan
told  him.  “You  have  a  hell  of  an  opening,  coast for  a
while, and then have a hell of a close.” Reagan indeed
had a “hell of an opening”: one of the most lavish and
expensive presidential inaugurations in American his-
tory  in  1981  (and  another  in  1985),  showing  that  he
was  unafraid  to  celebrate  luxury  and  opulence,  even
with millions of Americans unemployed.

Following  his  spectacular  inauguration,  Reagan
quickly  won  passage  of  his  tax  reduction  bill  and
launched his plan to bolster the Pentagon. But then a
long  “coasting”  period  descended  on  his  presidency,
during which he retreated on tax cuts and navigated a
major  foreign  policy  scandal.  Finally,  toward  the  end
of his two-term presidency, Reagan found his “hell of

Another Barrier Falls

In 1981, Sandra Day O’Connor, shown here with Chief
Justice Warren Burger, was appointed to the Supreme Court
by President Ronald Reagan, the ﬁrst woman to serve on that
body. In 1993, she was joined by Ruth Bader Ginsburg, an
appointee of President Bill Clinton. O’Connor emerged as a
leader of the moderate bloc on the Court during the 1990s;
she retired in 2006. Black Star/Stockphoto.com.

But Reagan also elevated Justice William Rehnquist,
a conservative Nixon appointee, to the position of chief
justice. Under Rehnquist’s leadership (1986–2005), the
Court’s conservatives took an activist stance, limiting
the reach of federal laws, ending court-ordered busing,
and  endorsing  constitutional  protection  of  property
rights. However, on controversial issues such as indi-
vidual liberties, abortion rights, affirmative action, and
the  rights  of  criminal  defendants,  the  presence  of
O’Connor  enabled  the  Court  to  resist  the  rightward
drift and to maintain a moderate position. As a result,
the justices scaled back, but did not usually overturn,
the  liberal  rulings  of  the  Warren  and  Burger  Courts.
In  the  controversial  Webster  v.  Reproductive  Health
Services (1989), for instance, Scalia pushed for the jus-
tices to overturn the abortion-rights decision in Roe v.
Wade  (1973).  O’Connor  refused,  but  she  nonetheless
approved the constitutional validity of state  laws that
limited the use of public funds and facilities for abor-
tions.  A  more  conservative  federal  judiciary  would
remain a significant institutional legacy of the Reagan
presidency.

