986

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

HIV/AIDS

The HIV/AIDS epidemic hit the United States in the early 1980s and remained a major social and political
issue throughout the decade. Here, AIDS patients and their supporters participate in the 1987 March on
Washington for Gay and Lesbian Rights, demanding that the Reagan administration commit more federal
resources to ﬁnding a cure for the deadly disease. © Bettmann/Corbis.

a  close,”  leaving  office  as  major  reforms — which  he
encouraged  from  afar — had  begun  to  tear  apart  the
Soviet  Union  and  bring  an  end  to  the  Cold  War.
Through  all  the  ups  and  downs,  Reagan  remained  a
master  of  the  politics  of  symbolism,  championing  a
resurgent  American  economy  and  reassuring  the
country that the pursuit of wealth was noble and that
he had the reins of the nation firmly in hand.

Reagan’s tax cuts had barely taken effect when he
was  forced  to  reverse  course.  High  interest  rates  set
by  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  had  cut  the  runaway
inflation of the Carter years. But these rates — as high
as  18  percent — sent  the  economy  into  a  recession in
1981–1982 that put 10 million Americans out of work
and  shuttered  17,000  businesses.  Unemployment
neared  10  percent,  the  highest  rate  since  the  Great
Depression. These troubles, combined with the boom-
ing  deficit,  forced  Reagan  to  negotiate  a  tax  increase
with  Congress  in  1982 — to  the  loud  complaints  of
supply-side diehards. The president’s job rating plum-
meted, and in the 1982 midterm elections Democrats
picked  up  twenty-six  seats  in  the  House  of  Repre-
sentatives and seven state governorships.

Election of 1984  Fortunately for Reagan, the econ-
omy had recovered by 1983, restoring the president’s job
approval rating just in time for the 1984 presidential

leaders,  Mondale  epitomized

election.  During  the  campaign,  Reagan  emphasized
the  economic  resurgence,  touring  the  country  pro-
moting his tax policies and the nation’s new prosper-
ity. The Democrats nominated former vice president
Walter  Mondale  of  Minnesota.  With  strong  ties  to
labor unions, ethnic and racial minority groups, and
party
the  New
Deal  coalition.  He  selected  Representative  Geraldine
Ferraro  of  New  York  as  his  running  mate — the  first
woman  to  run  on  the  presidential  ticket  of  a  major
political party. Neither Ferraro’s presence nor Mondale’s
credentials made a difference, however: Reagan won a
landslide  victory,  losing  only  Minnesota  and  the
District  of  Columbia.  Still,  Democrats  retained  their
majority in the House and, in 1986, regained control
of the Senate.

Reagan’s  1984  campaign  slogan,  “It’s  Morning  in
America,” projected the image of a new day dawning
on a confident people. In Reagan mythology, the United
States was an optimistic nation of small towns, close-
knit families, and kindly neighbors. “The success story
of America,” he once said, “is neighbor helping neigh-
bor.” The mythology may not have reflected the actual
nation — which was overwhelmingly urban and subur-
ban, and in which the hard knocks of capitalism held
down  more  than  opportunity  elevated — but  that
mattered little. Reagan’s remarkable ability to produce

