CHAPTER 30

  Conservative America in the Ascent, 1980–1991

987

Presidential Landscaping

As the cartoon published by the Arkansas Gazette
illustrates, powerful imagery was also wielded by
Reagan’s political opponents. Used with permission/
Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, 1984.

positive  associations  and  feelings,  alongside  robust
economic  growth  after  the  1981–1982  recession,
helped make the 1980s a decade characterized by both
backward-looking nostalgia and aggressive capitalism.

Return to Prosperity  Between 1945 and the 1970s,
the  United  States  was  the  world’s  leading  exporter  of
agricultural products, manufactured goods, and invest-
ment capital. Then American manufacturers lost mar-
ket  share,  undercut  by  cheaper  and  better-designed
products from West Germany and Japan. By 1985, for
the first time since 1915, the United States registered a
negative  balance  of  international  payments.  It  now
imported more goods and capital than it exported. The
country  became  a  debtor  (rather  than  a  creditor)
nation.  The  rapid  ascent  of  the  Japanese  economy  to
become the world’s second largest was a key factor in
this  historic  reversal  (America  Compared,  p.  988).
More than one-third of the American annual trade def-
icit  of  $138  billion  in  the  1980s  was  from  trade  with
Japan, whose corporations exported huge quantities of
electronic  goods  and  made  nearly  one-quarter  of  all
cars bought in the United States.

Meanwhile,  American  businesses  grappled  with
a  worrisome  decline  in  productivity.  Between  1973
and  1992,  American  productivity  (the  amount  of
goods or services per hour of work) grew at the mea-
ger rate of 1 percent a year — a far cry from the post–
World  War  II  rate  of  3  percent.  Because  managers
wanted to cut costs, the wages of most employees stag-
nated.  Further,  because  of  foreign  competition,  the

number of high-paying, union-protected manufactur-
ing jobs shrank. By 1985, more people in the United
States worked for McDonald’s slinging Big Macs than
rolled out rails, girders, and sheet steel in the nation’s
steel industry.

A brief return to competitiveness in the second half
of the 1980s masked the steady long-term transforma-
tion of the economy that had begun in the 1970s. The
nation’s  heavy  industries — steel,  autos,  chemicals —
continued to lose market share to global competitors.
Nevertheless, the U.S. economy grew at the impressive
average rate of 2 to 3 percent per year for much of the
late 1980s and 1990s (with a short recession in 1990–
1991). What had changed was the direction of growth
and  its  beneficiaries.  Increasingly,  financial  services,
medical  services,  and  computer  technology — service
industries, broadly speaking — were the leading sectors
of  growth. This  shift in  the  underlying  foundation of
the  American  economy,  from  manufacturing  to  ser-
vice, from making things to producing services, would
have long-term consequences for the global competi-
tiveness of U.S. industries and the value of the dollar.

Culture  of  Success  The  economic  growth  of  the
second half of the 1980s popularized the materialistic
values  championed  by  the  free  marketeers.  Every  era
has  its  capitalist  heroes,  but  Americans  in  the  1980s
celebrated wealth accumulation in ways unseen since
the  1920s.  When  the  president  christened  self-made
entrepreneurs “the heroes for the eighties,” he probably
had  people  like  Lee  Iacocca  in  mind.  Born  to  Italian

