A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Yoichi Funabashi

“Japan and America:

Global Partners”

Educated at the University of Tokyo and Keio University, Yoichi Funabashi is a
prize-winning  journalist  who  specializes  in  the  U.S.-Japan  economic  relation-
ship. During the 1980s, he lived in the United States as a columnist (and later
bureau chief) for the Asahi Shimbun, one of Japan’s most important daily news-
papers.

As Japan struggled to rebuild itself after World War II, the
charismatic Shigeru Yoshida, prime minister during the
critical years of 1948 to 1952, called on the country to be
a good loser. The Japanese have lost the war, he said, but
they must not lose heart. Japan must cooperate with the
United States, and pull itself out of misery and disgrace.
The Japanese did indeed cooperate willingly with the Al-
lied occupation — with the American (and British) “dev-
ils” whom they had been taught for years to despise to the
very core of their souls. . . .

Postwar Japan went on to prove that it could indeed
be a good loser. Under the new constitution promulgated
under the guidance of the occupation, it has developed
into a democratic country with a relatively moderate dis-
parity between rich and poor and a stable, smoothly
functioning political system. . . .

The Japanese-U.S. relationship has thus come to
occupy a truly unique position in world history. Never
before has a multiethnic, contract-based society and a
homogenous, traditional society joined together to form
such a powerful team. As global powers, Japan and the
United States combined have a decisive impact on world
politics; it follows that their future relations will largely
determine the blueprints of multilateral cooperation and
world stability in the coming century. . . .

Potential sources of bilateral friction are as numerous
as ever: the trade imbalance, market liberalization, grow-
ing Japanese investment in the United States, heavy U.S.
dependence on Japanese technology, and so on. Occa-
sional outbursts of economic nationalism, or “revisionist”
thinking are probably inevitable as the debate over these
issues unfolds. . . .

Of far greater concern, however, is that Japanese-
U.S. relations now face their gravest challenge since

1945. The end of the Cold War has drastically altered
the global geopolitical and geoeconomic context that
shaped Japanese-U.S. relations. Both countries now face
the urgent need to redefine their relationship to suit the
new context. . . .

Before they can build a strong bilateral relationship,
Americans and Japanese must outgrow their obsession
with being Number One. This psychological adjustment
is absolutely necessary for both peoples. Projecting the
nature of its own hierarchical society, Japan tends to view
the rest of the world, it is said, in terms of ranking. This
inclination fosters behavior patterns that are oriented
more toward what to be than what to do. Japan is also
overly conscious of itself as a late-starter, having entered
modern international society only in the mid-nineteenth
century, and this history has made catching up with and
outpacing other countries a sort of national pastime. . . .
It may be even more difficult for the United States, which
dominated the free world during the Cold War, to make
the psychological adjustments required to enter into a
partnership with Japan that is truly equal.

Source: Yoichi Funabashi, “Japan and America: Global Partners,” Foreign Policy 86
(Spring 1992): 24–39.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Among the “sources of bilateral friction” Funabashi lists
the trade imbalance and Japanese investment in the
United States. Why would these cause friction?

2.  How had the U.S.-Japan relationship changed between

1945 and the 1980s?

immigrants  and  trained  as  an  engineer,  Iacocca  rose
through  the  ranks  to  become  president  of  the  Ford
Motor  Corporation.  In  1978,  he  took  over  the  ailing
Chrysler Corporation and made it profitable again — by
securing  a  crucial  $1.5  billion  loan  from  the  U.S.

government,  pushing  the  development  of  new  cars,
and  selling  them  on  TV.  His  patriotic  commercials
in  the  1980s  echoed  Reagan’s  rhetoric:  “Let’s  make
American  mean  something  again.”  Iacocca’s  restora-
tion  would  not  endure,  however:  in  2009,  Chrysler

988

