CHAPTER 30

  Conservative America in the Ascent, 1980–1991

989

declared bankruptcy and was forced to sell a majority
stake to the Italian company Fiat.

If  Iacocca  symbolized  a  resurgent  corporate
America,  high-profile  financial  wheeler-dealers  also
captured  Americans’  imagination.  One  was  Ivan
Boesky,  a  white-collar  criminal  convicted  of  insider
trading (buying or selling stock based on information
from  corporate  insiders).  “I  think  greed  is  healthy,”
Boesky told a business school graduating class. Boesky
inspired  the  fictional  film  character  Gordon  Gekko,
who proclaimed “Greed is good!” in 1987’s Wall Street.
A new generation of Wall Street executives, of which
Boesky was one example, pioneered the leveraged buy-
out (LBO). In a typical LBO, a financier used heavily
leveraged (borrowed) capital to buy a company, quickly
restructured that company to make it appear spectacu-
larly profitable, and then sold it at a higher price.

To see a movie still from Wall Street, along with
other primary sources from this period, see Sources
for America’s History.

Americans  had  not  set  aside  the  traditional  work
ethic,  but  the  Reagan-era  public  was  fascinated  with
money  and  celebrity.  (The  documentary  television
show Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous began its run in
1984.) One of the most enthralling of the era’s money
moguls was Donald Trump, a real estate developer who
craved publicity. In 1983, the flamboyant Trump built
the  equally  flamboyant  Trump  Towers  in  New  York
City.  At  the  entrance  of  the  $200  million  apartment
building stood two enormous bronze T’s, a display of
self-promotion  reinforced  by  the  media.  Calling  him
“The Donald,” a nickname used by Trump’s first wife,
TV  reporters  and  magazines  commented  relentlessly
on his marriages, divorces, and glitzy lifestyle.

The  Computer  Revolution  While Trump grabbed
headlines and made splashy real estate investments, a
handful of quieter, less flashy entrepreneurs was busy
changing the face of the American economy. Bill Gates,
Paul  Allen,  Steve  Jobs,  and  Steve  Wozniak  were  four
entrepreneurs who pioneered the computer revolution
in  the  late  1970s  and  1980s  (Thinking  Like  a  Histor-
ian,  p.  990).  They  took  a  technology  that  had  been
used exclusively for large-scale enterprises — the mili-
tary  and  multinational  corporations — and  made  it
acces sible  to  individual  consumers.  Scientists  had
devised  the  first  computers  for  military  purposes
during  World  War  II.  Cold  War  military  research
subsequently  funded  the  construction  of  large  main-
frame computers. But government and private-sector

first-generation  computers  were  bulky,  cumbersome
machines that had to be placed in large air-conditioned
rooms.

Between the 1950s and the 1970s, concluding with
the development of the microprocessor in 1971, each
generation  of  computers  grew  faster  and  smaller.  By
the mid-1970s, a few microchips the size of the letter O
on this page provided as much processing power as a
World War II–era computer. The day of the personal
computer  (PC)  had  arrived.  Working  in  the  San
Francisco Bay Area, Jobs and Wozniak founded Apple
Computers in 1976 and within a year were producing
small, individual computers that  could be easily used
by a single person. When Apple enjoyed success, other
companies  scrambled  to  get  into  the  market.  Inter-
national Business Machines (IBM) offered its first per-
sonal computer in 1981, but Apple Corporation’s 1984
Macintosh computer (later short-
ened  to  “Mac”)  became  the  first
runaway commercial success for a
personal computer.

Meanwhile,  two  former  high
school classmates, Gates, age nine-
teen,  and  Allen,  age  twenty-one,
had  set  a  goal  in  the  early  1970s
of putting “a personal computer on every desk and in
every  home.”  They  recognized  that  software  was  the
key. In 1975, they founded the Microsoft Corporation,
whose MS-DOS and Win dows operating systems soon
dominated the software industry. By 2000, the compa-
ny’s products ran nine out of every ten personal com-
puters  in  the  United  States  and  a  majority  of  those
around the world. Gates and Allen became billionaires,
and  Microsoft  exploded  into  a  huge  company  with
57,000 employees and annual revenues of $38 billion. In
three  decades,  the  computer  had  moved  from  a  few
military  research  centers  to  thousands  of  corporate
offices and then to millions of people’s homes. Ironically,
in an age that celebrated free-market capitalism, gov-
ernment research and government funding had played
an  enormous  role  in  the  development  of  the  most
important technology since television.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
In what ways did American
society embrace economic
success and individualism
in the 1980s?

The End of the Cold War
Ronald Reagan entered office determined to confront
the Soviet Union diplomatically and militarily. Backed
by  Republican  and  Democratic  hard-liners  alike,
Reagan unleashed some of the harshest Cold War rhet-
oric since the 1950s, labeling the Soviet Union an “evil

