T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Personal Computing:

A Technological

Revolution

Considered historically, computers are a strikingly new phenomenon. The ances-
tors of the ﬁrst computers were developed in the 1940s using vacuum tubes and
transistors. Integrated circuits were introduced in the 1950s and the ﬁrst micro-
processor in the 1970s. Prior to the decade of the 1980s, only the federal govern-
ment and large corporations and institutions used computers, which were mas-
sive in size and expensive to purchase. In the 1980s, inventors and entrepreneurs
developed the ﬁrst “personal” computers, which could ﬁt on desks or tables and
were soon within the price range of ordinary families. The computers we know
today date from that decade. Another enormous change came in the mid-1990s,
when the Internet, whose forerunner was a U.S. Defense Department computer
network, became widely available to the public for the ﬁrst time.

1.  Moore’s law, 1965. In 1965, the electronics engineer
Gordon Moore calculated that the number of tran-
sistors on an integrated circuit doubled roughly
every two years, meaning that the power of
computers was increasing at that rate.

The complexity for minimum component costs has
increased at a rate of roughly a factor of two per year.
Certainly over the short term this rate can be expected
to continue, if not increase. . . . That means by 1975, the
number of components per integrated circuit for mini-
mum cost will be 65,000.

I believe that such a large circuit can be built on a

single wafer.

2.  Scene from 2001: A Space Odyssey, 1968. In this
scene from an acclaimed science ﬁction ﬁlm, a
space station’s computer system, named HAL,
defends itself against an astronaut who is
determined to shut down the computer.

Dave Bowman: Hello, HAL. Do you read me, HAL?
HAL: Affirmative, Dave. I read you.
DB: Open the pod bay doors, HAL.
HAL: I’m sorry, Dave. I’m afraid I can’t do that.
DB: What’s the problem?
HAL: I think you know what the problem is just as well as
I do.
DB: What are you talking about, HAL?
HAL: This mission is too important for me to allow you
to jeopardize it.
DB: I don’t know what you’re talking about, HAL.
HAL: I know that you and Frank were planning to dis-
connect me, and I’m afraid that’s something I cannot
allow to happen.
DB: Where the hell did you get that idea, HAL?

HAL: Dave, although you took very thorough precautions
in the pod against my hearing you, I could see your lips
move.
DB: Alright, HAL. I’ll go in through the emergency
airlock.
HAL: Without your space helmet, Dave? You’re going to
find that rather difficult.
DB: HAL, I won’t argue with you anymore! Open the
door!
HAL: Dave, this conversation can serve no purpose any-
more. Goodbye.

3.  Neil Ardley, World of Tomorrow: School, Work, and

Play, 1981. In this book written for teenagers, Neil
Ardley speculated about the future of computers.

Imagine you are living in the future, and are doing a
project on Halley’s comet. It’s quite some time since it
last appeared in 1986, and you want to find out when it
will again be seen from Earth. You also want to know the
results of a space mission to the comet, and find out what
the comet is made of.

In the days when the last comet appeared, you would

have had to look up Halley’s comet in an encyclopedia
or a book on astronomy. If you didn’t possess these
books, you would have gone to the library to get the
information. . . .

People still collect books as valuable antiques or for a
hobby, but you get virtually all the information you need
from the viewscreen of your home computer. The com-
puter is linked to a library — not a library of books but
an electronic library where information on every sub-
ject is stored in computer memory banks. . . .

Computers will make the world of tomorrow a much
safer place. They will do away with cash, so that you need

990

