no longer fear being attacked for your money. In addition,
you need not worry that your home will be burgled or
your car stolen. The computers in your home and car will
guard them, allowing only yourself to enter or someone
with your permission.

4.  Scene from Terminator, 1984. A national defense
computer network called Skynet decides to exter-
minate humanity in the ﬁlm Terminator.

Reese: There was a war. A few years from now. Nuclear
war. The whole thing. All this — [His gesture includes the
car, the city, the world.] — everything is gone. Just gone.
There were survivors. Here. There. Nobody knew who
started it. (pause) It was the machines.
Sarah: I don’t understand. . . .
Reese: Defense network computer. New. Powerful.
Hooked into everything. Trusted to run it all. They say it
got smart . . . a new order of intelligence. Then it saw all
people as a threat, not just the ones on the other side.
Decided our fate in a microsecond . . . extermination.

5.  Interview with Steve Jobs, February 1, 1985. Apple
founder Steve Jobs, one of the pioneers of the per-
sonal computer, discusses the future of computers
and computer networks.

Question: Why should a person buy a computer?
Steve Jobs: There are different answers for different
people. In business, that question is easy to answer: You
can really prepare documents much faster and at a higher
quality level, and you can do many things to increase
office productivity. A computer frees people from much
of the menial work. . . . Remember computers are tools.
Tools help us do our work better. In education, com-
puters are the first thing to come along since books that
will sit there and interact with you endlessly, without
judgment. . . .

Question: What will change?
Steve Jobs: The most compelling reason for most people
to buy a computer for the home [in the future] will be
to link it into a nationwide communications network.
We’re just in the beginning stages of what will be a truly
remarkable breakthrough for most people — as remark-
able as the telephone.

6.  Percentage of Americans using the Internet.

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0
9
9
1

1
9
9
1

2
9
9
1

3
9
9
1

4
9
9
1

5
9
9
1

6
9
9
1

7
9
9
1

8
9
9
1

9
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

1
0
0
2

2
0
0
2

3
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

6
0
0
2

Sources: (1) G. E. Moore, “Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits,”
Electronics, April 19, 1965, 114; (2) 2001: A Space Odyssey, Screenplay by Stanley
Kubrick and Arthur C. Clarke (Hawk Films Ltd. and MGM Studios, 1967); (3) Neil
Ardley, World of Tomorrow: School, Work, and Play (New York: Franklin Watts, 1981),
20–27; (4) Terminator, Screenplay by James Cameron and Gale Anne Hurd, Fifth Draft
(Pacific Western Productions, Inc., March 11, 1984), 134; (5) Playboy, February 1,
1985, 52.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Compare sources 2 and 4. Anxiety about the extraordi-
nary power of computers has been a regular feature of
science ﬁction, both in writing and in ﬁlm, since the late
1950s. What do the scenes from these two ﬁlms tell us
about the cultural reactions to computers early in their
development?

2.  How does source 3 offer a different vision of a future

with computers? Why do you think cultural responses to
computers tend to swing between extreme anxiety and
equally extreme optimism?

3.  How does Steve Jobs’s assessment of computers in source
5 compare with those in the other documents? Should
we trust his judgment more because he is closer to their
actual development? Why or why not?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Drawing on the history of personal computers discussed in
this chapter, as well as on the documents above, write an
essay in which you assess the origin of the personal com-
puter. What cultural reactions and predictions surrounded
the computer’s birth? What economic and social transfor-
mations did it have the potential to unleash? You might
also consider a comparison of the Industrial Revolution of
the second half of the nineteenth century and the “com-
puter revolution” of the late twentieth century. Are there
parallels in how each development transformed American
society?

991

