992

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

empire” and vowing that it would end up “on the ash
heap of history.” In a remarkable turnaround, however,
by his second term Reagan had decided that this goal
would  be  best  achieved  by  actively  cooperating  with
Mikhail  Gorbachev,  the  reform-minded  Russian
Communist leader. The downfall of the Soviet Union
in 1991 ended the nearly fifty-year-long Cold War, but
a new set of foreign challenges quickly emerged.

U.S.-Soviet Relations in a New Era
When  Reagan  assumed  the  presidency  in  1981,  he
broke  with  his  immediate  predecessors — Richard
Nixon, Gerald Ford, and Jimmy Carter — in Cold War
strategy.  Nixon  regarded  himself  as  a  “realist”  in  for-
eign  affairs.  That  meant,  above  all,  advancing  the
national  interest  without  regard  to  ideology.  Nixon’s
policy  of  détente  with  the  Soviet  Union  and  China
embodied this realist view. President Carter endorsed
détente and continued to push for relaxing Cold War
tensions. This worked for a time, but the Soviet inva-
sion of Afghanistan empowered hard-liners in the U.S.
Congress  and  forced  Carter  to  take  a  tougher  line —
which  he  did  with  the  Olympic  boycott  and  grain
embargo. This was the relationship Reagan inherited in
1981: a decade of détente that had produced a notice-
able relaxation of tensions with the communist world,
followed  by  a  year  of  tense  standoffs  over  Soviet
advances  into  Central  Asia,  which  threatened  U.S.
interests in the Middle East.

Reagan’s Cold War Revival  Conservatives did not
believe  in  détente.  Neither  did  they  believe  in  the
containment  policy  that  had  guided  U.S.  Cold  War
strategy  since  1947.  Reagan  and  his  advisors  wanted
to  defeat,  not  merely  contain,  the  Soviet  Union.  His
administration pursued a two-pronged strategy toward
that  end.  First,  it  abandoned  détente  and  set  about
rearming  America.  Reagan’s  military  budgets  autho-
rized  new  weapons  systems,  dramatically  expanded
military bases, and significantly expanded the nation’s
nuclear  arsenal.  This  buildup  in  American  military
strength,  reasoned  Secretary  of  Defense  Caspar
Weinberger, would force the Soviets into an arms race
that  would  strain  their  economy  and  cause  domestic
unrest.  One  of  the  most  controversial  aspects  of  the
buildup was Reagan’s proposal for a Strategic Defense
Initiative — popularly  known  as  “Star  Wars” — a
satellite-based system that would, theoretically, destroy
nuclear missiles in flight. Scientists doubted its viabil-
ity, and it was never built. The Reagan administration
also  proposed  the  Strategic  Arms  Reduction  Talks

(START) with the Soviet Union, in which the United
States  put  forward  a  plan  calculated  to  increase
American advantage in sea- and air-based nuclear sys-
tems over the Soviet’s ground-based system.

Second,  the  president  supported  CIA  initiatives
to  roll  back  Soviet  influence  in  the  developing  world
by  funding  anticommunist  movements  in  Angola,
Mozam bique,  Afghanistan,  and  Central  America.  To
accomplish  this  objective,  Reagan  supported  repres-
sive, right-wing regimes. Nowhere was this more con-
spicuous  in  the  1980s  than  in  the  Central  American
countries  of  Guatemala,  Nicaragua,  and  El  Salvador.
Conditions were unique in each country but held to a
pattern: the United States sided with military dictator-
ships and oligarchies if democratically elected govern-
ments  or  left-wing  movements  sought  support  from
the  Soviet  Union.  In  Guatemala,  this  approach  pro-
duced a brutal military rule — thousands of opponents
of  the  government  were  executed  or  kidnapped.  In
Nicaragua, Reagan actively encouraged a coup against
the left-wing Sandinista government, which had over-
thrown the U.S.-backed strongman Anastasio Somoza.
And in El Salvador, the U.S.-backed government main-
tained  secret  “death  squads,”  which  murdered  mem-
bers  of  the  opposition.  In  each  case,  Reagan  blocked
Soviet influence, but the damage done to local commu-
nities and to the international reputation of the United
States, as in Vietnam, was great.

Iran-Contra  Reagan’s determination to oppose left-
wing  movements  in  Central  America  engulfed  his
administration  in  a  major  scandal  during  the  presi-
dent’s second term. For years, Reagan had denounced
Iran as an “outlaw state” and a supporter of terrorism.
But in 1985, he wanted its help. To win Iran’s assistance
in  freeing  two  dozen  American  hostages  held  by
Hezbollah, a pro-Iranian Shiite group in Lebanon, the
administration  sold  arms  to  Iran  without  public  or
congressional knowledge. While this secret arms deal
was  diplomatically  and  politically  controversial,  the
use of the resulting profits in Nicaragua was explicitly
illegal. To overthrow the democratically elected Sandi-
nistas, whom the president accused of threatening U.S.
business interests, Reagan ordered the CIA to assist an
armed opposition group called the Contras (Map 30.2).
Although  Reagan  praised  the  Contras  as  “freedom
fighters,”  Congress  worried  that  the  president  and
other  executive  branch  agencies  were  assuming  war-
making  powers  that  the  Constitution  reserved  to  the
legislature. In 1984, Congress banned the CIA and all
other  government  agencies  from  providing  any  mili-
tary support to the Contras.

