CHAPTER 30

  Conservative America in the Ascent, 1980–1991

993

Iran-Contra

The 1987 Iran-Contra congressional hearings,
which lasted more than a month and were
broadcast on live television, helped to uncover
a secret and illegal White House scheme to
provide arms to the Nicaraguan Contras.
Though Lt. Col. Oliver North (shown here
during his testimony before Congress)
concocted much of the scheme and
was convicted of three felonies, he
never served prison time and emerged
from the hearings as a populist hero
among American conservatives, who
saw him as a patriot. © Bettmann/Corbis.

Oliver  North,  a  lieutenant  colonel  in  the  U.S.
Marines and an aide to the National Security Council,
defied  that  ban.  With  the  tacit  or  explicit  consent  of
high-ranking  administration  officials,  including  the
president,  North  used  the  profits  from  the  Iranian
arms deal to assist the Contras. When asked whether
he  knew  of  North’s  illegal  actions,  Reagan  replied,
“I  don’t  remember.”  The  Iran-Contra  affair  not  only
resulted in the prosecution of North and several other
officials but also weakened Reagan domestically — he
proposed  no  bold  domestic  policy  initiatives  in  his
last two years. But the president remained steadfastly
engaged  in  international  affairs,  where  events  were
unfolding  that  would  bring  a  dramatic  close  to  the
Cold War.

Gorbachev and Soviet Reform  The Soviet system
of state socialism and central economic planning had
transformed Russia from an agricultural to an indus-
trial  society  between  1917  and  the  1950s.  But  it  had
done so inefficiently. Lacking the incentives of a mar-
ket economy, most enterprises hoarded raw materials,
employed too many workers, and did not develop new
products. Except in military weaponry and space tech-
nology,  the  Russian  economy  fell  further  and  further
behind those of capitalist societies, and most people in
the  Soviet  bloc  endured  a  low  standard  of  living.
Moreover, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979,

like  the  American  war  in  Vietnam,  turned  out  to  be
a  major  blunder — an  unwinnable  war  that  cost  vast
amounts  of  money,  destroyed  military  morale,  and
undermined popular support of the government.

Mikhail  Gorbachev,  a  relatively  young  Russian
leader who became general secretary of the Communist
Party  in  1985,  recognized  the  need  for  internal  eco-
nomic reform and an end to the war in Afghanistan.
An iconoclast in Soviet terms, Gorbachev introduced
policies of  glasnost (openness) and  perestroika (eco-
nomic  restructuring),  which  encouraged  widespread
criticism  of  the  rigid  institutions  and  authoritarian
controls of the Communist regime. To lessen tensions
with  the  United  States,  Gorbachev  met  with  Reagan
in 1985, and the two leaders established a warm per-
sonal rapport. By 1987, they had agreed to eliminate all
intermediate-range  nuclear  missiles  based  in  Europe.
A  year  later,  Gorbachev  ordered  Soviet  troops  out  of
Afghanistan,  and  Reagan  replaced  many  of  his  hard-
line advisors with policymakers who favored a renewal
of  détente.  Reagan’s  sudden  reversal  with  regard  to
the  Soviet  Union  remains  one
of  the  most  intriguing  aspects
of his presidency. Many conserva-
tives  worried  that  their  cowboy-
hero  president  had  been  duped
by  a  duplicitous  Gorbachev,  but
Reagan’s  gamble  paid  off:  the

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did Reagan’s
approach to the Soviet
Union change between
1981 and 1989?

