994

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

U N I T E D   S T A T E S

New Orleans

(cid:2)

Gulf of Mexico

1959 – Castro ousts dictator Batista.
1961 – CIA-backed Cuban exiles launch
               unsuccessful invasion at Bay of Pigs.
1962 – Cuban missile crisis: U.S. blockades Cuba.

Miami

(cid:2)

Nassau

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Havana

CUBA

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

A T L A N T I C
O C E A N

B

A

H

A

M

A

S

1991 – Military coup ousts President Aristide.
1994 – U.S. troops oversee peaceful return of
               Aristide to power.

DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC

1965 – U.S. troops invade to
               prevent leftist takeover.

M E X I C O

Mexico City

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Veracruz

YUCATAN
PENINSULA

Belmopan

(cid:2)
BELIZE

1954 – U.S.-backed coup
              overthrows Arbenz’s
              socialist government.

Kingston
(cid:2)

JAMAICA

HAITI

(cid:2)

Port-au-
Prince

(cid:2)
Santo
Domingo

(cid:2)
Puerto
Rico

San Juan

U.S.
VIRGIN
ISLANDS

N

W

E

S

P A C I F I C
O C E A N

Guatemala

(cid:2)
San
Salvador

GUATEMALA

EL SALVADOR

1980s – U.S. sends money and
                 military advisors to aid
                 right-wing regime
                 against leftist uprising.

HONDURAS

(cid:2)

Tegucigalpa

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Managua

1979 – Somoza regime overthrown;
              Sandinistas come to power.
1979-  U.S.-backed Contra rebels and
’89        Sandinistas fight civil war.
1990 – Sandinistas defeated in elections;
              coalition government comes to power.

C a r i b b e a n   S e a

NICARAGUA

San Jose

(cid:2)

COSTA
RICA

1964 – U.S. troops quell anti-American rioting
               in Canal Zone.
1978 – Treaty provides for joint U.S.-Panama
               control of Canal Zone in preparation
               for full turnover of canal.
1989 – U.S. troops invade, capturing
              dictator Noriega.
1999 – Control of canal returned to Panama.

Panama

(cid:2)

PANAMA

COLOMBIA

1983 – U.S. troops invade to
               oust a communist regime.

Grenada

(cid:2)
Caracas

VENEZUELA

MAP 30.2
U.S. Involvement in Latin America and the Caribbean, 1954–2000

Ever since the Monroe Doctrine (1823), the United States has claimed a special interest in Latin
America. During the Cold War, U.S. foreign policy throughout Latin America focused on containing
instability and the appeal of communism in a region plagued by poverty and military dictatorships.
Providing foreign aid was one approach to addressing social and economic needs, but the United
States frequently intervened with military forces (or by supporting military coups) to remove
unfriendly or socialist governments. The Reagan administration’s support of the Contra rebels
in Nicaragua, some of which was contrary to U.S. law, was one of those interventions.

easing of tensions with the United States allowed the
Soviet  leader  to  press  forward  with  his  domestic
reforms.

As  Gorbachev’s  efforts  revealed  the  flaws  of  the
Soviet  system,  the  peoples  of  Eastern  and  Central
Europe demanded the ouster of their Communist gov-
ernments. In Poland, the Roman Catholic Church and
its  pope — Polish-born  John  Paul  II — joined  with
Solidarity,  the  trade  union  movement,  to  overthrow
the  pro-Soviet  regime.  In  1956  and  1964,  Russian
troops  had  quashed  similar  popular  uprisings  in
Hungary and East Germany. Now they did not inter-
vene,  and  a  series  of  peaceful  uprisings — “Velvet
Revolutions” — created a new political order through-
out  the  region. The  destruction  of  the  Berlin  Wall  in
1989 symbolized the end of Communist rule in Central

Europe.  Millions  of  television  viewers  worldwide
watched jubilant Germans knock down the hated wall
that had divided the city since 1961 — a vivid symbol of
communist  repression  and  the  Cold  War  division  of
Europe. A new geopolitical order in Europe was in the
making.

Alarmed  by  the  reforms,  Soviet  military  leaders
seized power in August 1991 and arrested Gorbachev.
But widespread popular opposition led by Boris Yeltsin,
the president of the Russian Republic, thwarted their
efforts to oust Gorbachev from office. This failure broke
the dominance of the Communist Party. On Decem-
ber  25,  1991,  the  Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics
formally dissolved to make way for an eleven-member
Commonwealth  of  Independent  States  (CIS).  The
Russian  Republic  assumed  leadership  of  the  CIS,  but

