CHAPTER 30

  Conservative America in the Ascent, 1980–1991

995

Reagan and Gorbachev: Fellow
Political Revolutionaries

Both Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev
changed the political outlook of their
nations. As Reagan undermined social-
welfare liberalism in the United States,
Gorbachev challenged the rigidity of the
Communist Party and state socialism in
the Soviet Union. Although they remained
ideological adversaries, by the mid-1980s
the two leaders had established a personal
rapport, which helped facilitate agreement
on a series of arms reduction measures.
© Bettmann/Corbis.

the Soviet Union was no more (Map 30.3). The collapse
of  the  Soviet  Union  was  the  result  of  internal  weak-
nesses of the Communist economy. External pressure
from  the  United  States  played  an  important,  though
secondary, role.

“Nobody — no country, no party, no person — ‘won’
the cold war,” concluded George Kennan, the architect
in  1947  of  the  American  policy  of  containment.  The
Cold War’s cost was enormous, and both sides benefit-
ted greatly from its end. For more than forty years, the
United States had fought a bitter economic and ideo-
logical  battle  against  that  communist  foe,  a  struggle
that exerted an enormous impact on American society.
Taxpayers had spent some $4 trillion on nuclear weap-
ons and trillions more on conventional arms, placing
the  United  States  on  a  permanent  war  footing  and
creating  a  massive  military-industrial  complex.  The
physical  and  psychological  costs  were  equally  high:

radiation  from  atomic  weapons  tests,  anticommunist
witch-hunts,  and  a  constant  fear  of  nuclear  annihila-
tion. Of course, most Americans had no qualms about
proclaiming victory, and advocates of free-market cap-
italism,  particularly  conservative  Republicans,  cele-
brated  the  outcome.  The  collapse  of  communism  in
Eastern  Europe  and  the  disintegration  of  the  Soviet
Union itself, they argued, demonstrated that they had
been right all along.

A New Political Order
at Home and Abroad
Ronald Reagan’s role in facilitating the end of the Cold
War  was  among  his  most  important  achievements.
Overall, his presidency left a mixed legacy. Despite his
pledge to get the federal government “off our backs,” he
could  not  ultimately  reduce  its  size  or  scope.  Social

