996

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

Election of 1988  George H. W. Bush, Reagan’s vice
president and successor, was not beloved by conserva-
tives, who did not see him as one of their own. But he
possessed an insider’s familiarity with government and
a  long  list  of  powerful  allies,  accumulated  over  three
decades  of  public  service.  Bush’s  route  to  the  White
House reflected the post-Reagan alignments in Ameri-
can politics. In the primaries, he faced a spirited chal-
lenge  from  Pat  Robertson,  the  archconservative  tel-
evangelist  whose  influence  and  profile  had  grown
during  Reagan’s  two  terms.  After  securing  the  presi-
dential nomination, which he won largely because of
his fierce loyalty to Reagan, Bush felt compelled to select
as  his  vice-presidential  running  mate  an  unknown
and inexperienced Indiana senator, Dan Quayle. Bush
hoped  that  Quayle  would  help  secure  the  Christian
“family values” vote upholding the traditional nuclear
family  and  Christian  morality.  Robertson’s  challenge
and Quayle’s selection showed that the Religious Right
had become a major force in Republican politics.

On the Democratic side, Jesse Jackson became the
first African American to challenge for a major-party
nomination,  winning  eleven  states  in  primary  and
caucus  voting.  However,  the  much  less  charismatic
Massachusetts governor, Michael Dukakis, emerged as
the Democratic nominee. Dukakis, a liberal from the
Northeast, proved unable to win back the constituen-
cies Democrats had lost in the 1970s: southern whites,
midwestern  blue-collar  Catholics,  and  middle-class
suburbanites.  Indeed,  Bush’s  campaign  manager,  Lee
Atwater, baited Dukakis by calling him a “card-carrying
liberal,” a not-so-subtle reference to J. Edgar Hoover’s
1958  phrase  “card-carrying  communist.”  Bush  won
with 53 percent of the vote, a larger margin of victory
than Reagan’s in 1980. The election confirmed a  new
pattern in presidential politics that would last through
the turn of the twenty-first century: every four years,
Americans would refight the battles of the 1960s, with
liberals on one side and conservatives on the other.

Middle East  The end of the Cold War left the United
States  as  the  world’s  only  military  superpower  and
raised  the  prospect  of  what  President  Bush  called  a
“new world order” dominated by the United States and
its European and Asian allies. American officials and
diplomats presumed that U.S. interests should prevail
in this new environment, but they now confronted an
array  of  regional,  religious,  and  ethnic  conflicts  that
defied  easy  solutions.  None  were  more  pressing  or
more complex than those in the Middle East — the oil-
rich  lands  stretching  from  Iran  to  Algeria.  Middle
Eastern conflicts would dominate the foreign policy of

The Wall Comes Down

As the Communist government of East Germany collapsed,
West Berliners showed their contempt for the wall dividing
Berlin by defacing it with grafﬁti. Then, in November 1989,
East and West Berliners destroyed huge sections of the wall
with sledgehammers, an act of psychic liberation that
symbolized the end of the Cold War. Alexandria Avakian/
Woodfin Camp & Associates.

Security  and  other  entitlement  programs  remained
untouched,  and  enormous  military  spending  out-
weighed  cuts  in  other  programs.  Determined  not  to
divide the country, Reagan did not actively push con-
troversial policies espoused by the Religious Right. He
called  for  tax  credits  for  private  religious  schools,
restrictions on abortions, and a constitutional amend-
ment to permit prayer in public schools, but he did not
expend his political capital to secure these measures.

While Reagan failed to roll back the social welfare
and  regulatory  state  of  the  New  Deal–Great  Society
era, he changed the dynamic of American politics. The
Reagan  presidency  restored  popular  belief
that
America — and  individual  Americans — could  enjoy
increasing prosperity. And his antigovernment rheto-
ric  won  many  adherents,  as  did  his  bold  and  fiscally
aggressive  tax  cuts.  Social-welfare  liberalism,  ascen-
dant since 1933, remained intact but was now on the
defensive — led by Reagan, conservatives had changed
the political conversation.

