CHAPTER 30

  Conservative America in the Ascent, 1980–1991

997

N
E
D
E
W
S

F
I
N
L
A
N
D

ESTONIA
Mar. 1990
LATVIA
May 1990
LITHUANIA
Mar. 1990
Baltic Sea

Tallinn

Riga

Vilnius

WAY

R
O
N

DENMARK

EAST
GERMANY
1990

RUSSIA

POLAND
1991

Minsk
BELARUS
Aug. 1991

LUX.

CZECH REP.
1991

GERMANY

SWITZ.

AUSTRIA

SLOVENIA
CROATIA

BOSNIA-
HERZEGOVINA

ITALY

SLOVAKIA
1991
HUNGARY
1991
Y
U
G
OSL
AVIA

MOLDOVA
Aug. 1991

ROMANIA
1991

BULGARIA
1991

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

R U S S I A

Moscow

N

W

E

S

KAZAKHSTAN
Dec. 1991

Lake
Balkhash

Alma-Ata
Bishkek

KYRGYZSTAN
Aug. 1991

TAJIKISTAN
Sept. 1991

Dushanbe

Aral
Sea

Tashkent

UZBEKISTAN
Aug. 1991

Caspian Sea

Tbilisi

Baku

TURKMENISTAN
Oct. 1991

Ashgabat

AFGHANISTAN

Kiev
UKRAINE
Aug. 1991
Chisinau

Black Sea

GEORGIA
Apr. 1991

ARMENIA
Aug. 1991

ALBANIA
1968

MACEDONIA

TURKEY

GREECE

Yerevan

AZERBAIJAN
Oct. 1991

IRAN

Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) linked to Russia
Territory of former USSR that did not
join CIS
Warsaw Pact nations allied with USSR

MAP 30.3
The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the Creation of Independent States, 1989–1991

The collapse of Soviet communism dramatically altered the political landscape of Central Europe
and Central Asia. The Warsaw Pact, the USSR’s answer to NATO, vanished. West and East Germany
reunited, and the nations created by the Versailles treaty of 1919 — Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Yugoslavia — reasserted their independence or split into
smaller, ethnically deﬁned nations. The Soviet republics bordering Russia, from Belarus in the
west to Kyrgyzstan in the east, also became independent states, while remaining loosely bound
with Russia in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).

the  United  States  for  the  next  two  decades,  replacing
the Cold War at the center of American geopolitics.

After Carter’s success negotiating the 1979 Egypt-
Israel treaty at Camp David, there were few bright spots
in U.S. Middle Eastern diplomacy. In 1982, the Reagan
administration supported Israel’s invasion of Lebanon,
a military operation intended to destroy the Palestine
Liberation  Organization  (PLO).  But  when  Lebanese
militants,  angered  at  U.S.  intervention  on  behalf  of
Israel, killed 241 American marines, Reagan abruptly
withdrew the forces. Three years later, Palestinians liv-
ing in the Gaza Strip and along the West Bank of the
Jordan  River — territories  occupied  by  Israel  since
1967 — mounted an intifada, a civilian uprising against
Israeli  authority.  In  response,  American  diplomats
stepped up their efforts to persuade the PLO and Arab
nations to accept the legitimacy of Israel and to con-
vince the Israelis to allow the creation of a Palestinian
state. Neither initiative met with much success. Unable,
or  unwilling,  to  solve  the  region’s  most  intractable

problems  and  burdened  by  a  history  of  support  for
undemocratic  regimes  in  Middle  Eastern  countries,
the  United  States  was  not  seen  by  residents  of  the
region as an honest broker.

Persian  Gulf  War  American  interest  in  a  reliable
supply of oil from the region led the United States into
a short but consequential war in the Persian Gulf in the
early 1990s. Ten years earlier, in September 1980, the
revolutionary Shiite Islamic nation of Iran, headed by
Ayatollah  Khomeini,  came  under  attack  from  Iraq,  a
secular state headed by the dictator Saddam Hussein.
The  fighting  was  intense  and  long  lasting — a  war  of
attrition that claimed a million casualties. Reagan sup-
ported  Hussein  with  military  intelligence  and  other
aid — in order to maintain supplies of Iraqi oil, under-
mine  Iran,  and  preserve  a  balance  of  power  in  the
Middle East. Finally, in 1988, an armistice ended the
inconclusive war, with both sides still claiming the ter-
ritory that sparked the conflict.

