998

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

Men — and Women — at War

Women played visible roles in the Per-
sian Gulf War, comprising approximately
10 percent of the American troops. In
the last decades of the twentieth century,
increasing numbers of women chose
military careers and, although prohibited
from most ﬁghting roles, were increasingly
assigned to combat zones. Luc Delahaye/
Sipa Press.

Two  years  later,  in  August  1990,  Hussein  went
to  war  to  expand  Iraq’s  boundaries  and  oil  supply.
Believing (erroneously) that he still had the support of
the United States, Hussein sent in troops and quickly
conquered Kuwait, Iraq’s small, oil-rich neighbor, and
threatened  Saudi  Arabia,  the  site  of  one-fifth  of  the
world’s known oil reserves and an informal ally of the
United  States.  To  preserve  Western  access  to  oil,
President George H. W. Bush sponsored a series of res-
olutions in the United Nations Security Council calling
for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait.
When Hussein refused, Bush suc-
cessfully  prodded  the  UN  to
authorize the use of force, and the
president  organized  a  military
coalition  of  thirty-four  nations.
Dividing mostly along party lines,
the  Republican-led  House  of  Representatives  autho-
rized American participation by a vote of 252 to 182,
and  the  Democratic-led  Senate  agreed  by  the  close
margin of 52 to 47.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
Why did the United States
intervene in the conﬂicts
between Iraq and Iran and
between Iraq and Kuwait?

The coalition forces led by the United States quickly
won the Persian Gulf War for the “liberation of Kuwait.”
To avoid a protracted struggle and retain French and
Russian  support  for  the  UN  coalition,  Bush  decided
against occupying Iraq and removing Saddam Hussein

from power. Instead, he won passage of UN Resolution
687,  which imposed  economic  sanctions  against  Iraq
unless it allowed unfettered inspection of its weapons
systems,  destroyed  all  biological  and  chemical  arms,
and  unconditionally  pledged  not  to  develop  nuclear
weapons.  The  military  victory,  the  low  incidence  of
American  casualties,  and  the  quick  withdrawal  pro-
duced  a  euphoric  reaction  at  home.  “By  God,  we’ve
kicked the Vietnam syndrome once and for all,” Bush
announced,  and  his  approval  rating  shot  up  precipi-
tously.  But  Saddam  Hussein  remained  a  formidable
power  in  the  region,  and  in  March  2003,  he  would
become the pretext for Bush’s son, President George W.
Bush, to initiate another war in Iraq — one that would
be  much  more  protracted,  expensive,  and  bloody  for
Americans and Iraqis alike (Chapter 31).

Thus the end of the Cold War brought not peace,
but a new American presence in the Middle East. For
half a century, the United States and the Soviet Union
had tried to divide the world into two rival economic
and  ideological  blocs:  communist  and  capitalist.  The
next decades promised a new set of struggles, one of
them between a Western-led agenda of economic and
cultural globalization and an anti-Western ideology of
Muslim  and  Arab  regionalism.  Still  more  post–Cold
War shifts were coming into view as well. One was the

