CHAPTER 30

  CHAPTER REVIEW

999

spectacular  emergence  of  the  European  Union  as  a
massive  united  trading  bloc,  economic  engine,  and
global political force. Another was the equally spectac-
ular economic growth in China, which was just begin-
ning to take off in the early 1990s. The post–Cold War
world promised to be a multipolar one, with great cen-
ters of power in Europe, the United States, and East Asia,
and seemingly intractable conflict in the Middle East.

SUMMARY
This  chapter  examined  two  central  developments  of
the years 1980–1991: the rise of the New Right in U.S.
politics  and  the  end  of  the  Cold  War.  Each  develop-
ment set the stage for a new era in American life, one
that stretches to our own day. Domestically, the New
Right, which had been building in strength since the
mid-1960s, criticized the liberalism of the Great Society
and the permissiveness that conservative activists asso-
ciated with feminism and the sexual revolution. Shift-
ing  their  allegiance  from  Barry  Goldwater  to  Ronald
Reagan,  right-wing  Americans  built  a  conservative

movement  from  the  ground  up  and  in  1980  elected
Reagan president. Advocating free-market economics,
lower taxes, and fewer government regulations, Reagan
became  a  champion  of  the  New  Right.  His  record  as
president was more mixed than his rhetoric would sug-
gest, however. Reagan’s initial tax cuts were followed by
tax hikes. Moreover, he frequently dismayed the Chris-
tian  Right  by  not  pursuing  their  interests  forcefully
enough — especially  regarding  abortion  and  school
prayer.

Reagan played a role in the ending of the Cold War.
His massive military buildup in the early 1980s strained
an  already  overstretched  Soviet  economy,  which
struggled  to  keep  pace.  Reagan  then  agreed  to  meet
with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev in several sum-
mits  between  1985  and  1987.  More  important  than
Reagan’s actions, however, were inefficiencies and con-
tradictions in the Soviet economic structure itself. Com-
bined with the forced military buildup and the disas-
trous war in Afghanistan, these strains led Gorbachev
to institute the first significant reforms in Soviet society
in half a century. The reforms stirred popular criticism
of the Soviet Union, which formally collapsed in 1991.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events

The Conscience of a Conservative

(p. 975)

National Review (p. 976)
Religious Right (p. 976)
hostage crisis (p. 977)
Reagan coalition (p. 981)
Moral Majority (p. 981)
Reagan Democrats (p. 982)
supply-side economics

(Reaganomics) (p. 982)
Economic Recovery Tax Act

(ERTA) (p. 983)

national debt (p. 983)
deregulation (p. 983)
HIV/AIDS (p. 985)
service industries (p. 987)
Sandinistas (p. 992)
Contras (p. 992)
Iran-Contra affair (p. 993)
glasnost (p. 993)
perestroika (p. 993)
family values (p. 996)
Persian Gulf War (p. 998)

Key People

Barry Goldwater (p. 974)
Ronald Reagan (p. 974)
William F. Buckley (p. 976)
Milton Friedman (p. 976)
David Stockman (p. 983)
Sandra Day O’Connor (p. 984)
Mikhail Gorbachev (p. 993)
George H. W. Bush (p. 996)

