1000

PART 9

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  In what ways were the “three-legged stool” compo-
nents  of  New  Right  conservatism  compatible?
Incompatible?

2.  How would you assess the historical importance of
Ronald  Reagan?  What  were  his  most  significant
legacies, domestically and internationally? Why?

3.  Why did the Cold War come to an end when it did?

What were the contributing factors?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events listed on the thematic timeline on page 971.
In  what  ways  was  the  New  Right  “reactive,”
responding to liberalism, and in what ways was it
“proactive,” asserting its own agenda?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS  TIME  AND  PLACE  Compare  the
two  major  periods  of  liberal  legislative  accom-
plishment — the  New  Deal  in  the  1930s  (Chapter
23)  and  the  Great  Society  in  the  1960s  (Chapter
28) — with the Reagan era in the 1980s. Did Reagan
undo  the  legislative  gains  of  those  earlier  eras?
What  conservative  objectives  was  he  able  to
accomplish,  and  what  limits  or  obstacles  did  he
encounter?

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  Examine  the  images  of
Reagan  in  this  chapter  (pp.  982,  987,  995).  What
message do these images convey about Reagan as a
person? About his policies? Together, what do they
tell  us  about  the  image  and  reality  of  the  Reagan
presidency? Do you think that cartoons or photo-
graphs are a more accurate source of information
for understanding the historical meaning of a par-
ticular  president  and  his  administration?  Why  or
why not?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Lou Cannon, President Reagan: The Role of a Lifetime
(2000). A valuable overview of the Reagan presidency.

William Martin, With God on Our Side: The Rise of the
Religious Right in America (1996).

Lisa McGirr, Suburban Warriors: The Origins of the
New American Right (2001). Explores the rise of the
New Right.

James T. Patterson, Restless Giant: The United States
from Watergate to Bush v. Gore (2005). Provides a
solid analysis of the 1980s and 1990s.

On foreign policy, consult Richard A. Melanson,
American Foreign Policy Since the Vietnam War
(2005), and Raymond Garthoff, The Great Transition:
American-Soviet Relations and the End of the Cold
War (1994).

Two fine Web sites that document various Cold
War incidents are the National Security Archive, at
gwu.edu/~nsarchiv, and the Cold War International
History Project, at wilsoncenter.org/index
.cfm?fuseaction=topics.home&topic_id=1409.

