Confronting Global and
National Dilemmas
1989 to the Present

On the morning of September 11,

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
How  has  globalization  affected
American  politics,  economics,  and
society?

2001,  two  commercial  airliners
were  deliberately  ﬂown  into  the
World  Trade  Center  in  lower  Manhattan.
Millions  of  Americans,  and  many  more
people worldwide, watched live on television and the Internet as the towers burned and
collapsed.  Simultaneously,  a  third  plane  was  ﬂown  into  the  Pentagon,  and  a  fourth
hijacked  plane  crashed  in  rural  Pennsylvania.  It  took  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation
ofﬁcials only a few hours to determine the identity of most of the hijackers, as well as
the organization behind the murderous attacks — Al Qaeda.

The attacks were made possible by the new era of globalization. Of the nineteen
terrorists involved in the hijackings, ﬁfteen were from Saudi Arabia, two were from the
United  Arab  Emirates,  one  was  from  Egypt,  and  one  was  from  Lebanon.  Many  had
trained in Afghanistan, in guerrilla warfare camps operated by Osama bin Laden. Four
had gone to ﬂight school in the United States itself. Several had lived and studied in
Germany.  They  communicated  with  one  another  and  with  planners  in  Afghanistan
through  e-mail,  Web  sites,  and  cell  phones.  Al  Qaeda  sympathizers  could  be  found
among Muslims from Indonesia to Algeria. The most conspicuous crime of the twenty-
ﬁrst century, which left 2,900 people dead and sent waves of shock and anxiety through
the American public, would have been impossible without the openness and intercon-
nectivity that are central features of globalization.

Messages of sympathy and support poured into the United States from nearly every
nation. Citizens of ﬁfty-three different countries had perished in the World Trade Cen-
ter, itself a symbol of the global ﬁnancial industries. The world, quite literally, stood in
shock. The emergence in the Middle East of a radical Muslim movement willing to use
terrorism  to  inﬂict  major  damage  on  the  United  States  and  the  West  testiﬁed  to  the
altered  realities  of  global  politics.  The  simple  Cold  War  duality — communism  versus
capitalism — had for decades obscured regional, ethnic, and religious loyalties and con-
ﬂicts. Those loyalties and conﬂicts moved to center stage in an era of globalization.

For Americans, the period between the end of the Cold War and our own day has
been deﬁned by twin dilemmas. The ﬁrst relates to globalization. How would the United
States engage in global trade and commerce? How would it relate to emerging nations?
How should it confront radical terrorists? The second dilemma relates to domestic poli-
tics  and  the  economy.  In  an  era  of  conservative  political  dominance,  how  would  the
nation manage its cultural conﬂicts and ensure economic opportunity and security for
its citizens? As “profound and powerful forces” shook the world, these were, as the
chapter title suggests, Americans’ dilemmas in a global society.

31

C H A P T E R

AMERICA IN THE
GLOBAL ECONOMY

The Rise of the European Union

and China

An Era of Globalization

Revolutions in Technology

POLITICS AND
PARTISANSHIP IN
A NEW ERA

An Increasingly Plural Society

Clashes over “Family Values”

The Clinton Presidency,

1993–2001

Post–Cold War Foreign Policy

INTO A NEW CENTURY

The Ascendance of
George W. Bush

Violence Abroad and Economic

Collapse at Home

The Obama Presidency

1002

