1004

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

America in the Global
Economy
On  November  30,  1999,  more  than  50,000  protesters
took to the streets of Seattle, Washington, immobiliz-
ing a wide swath of the city’s downtown. Police, armed
with  pepper  spray  and  arrayed  in  riot  gear,  worked
feverishly to clear the clogged streets, get traffic mov-
ing, and usher well-dressed government ministers from
around  the  world  into  a  conference  hall.  Protesters
jeered, chanted, and held hundreds of signs and ban-
ners  aloft.  A  radical  contingent  joined  the  otherwise
peaceful march, and a handful of them began breaking
the windows of the chain stores they saw as symbols of
global capitalism: Starbucks, Gap, Old Navy.

What  had  aroused  such  passion  in  the  so-called
Battle  of  Seattle?  Globalization.  The  vast  majority  of
Americans  never  surged  into  the  streets,  as  had  the
Seattle  protesters  who  tried  to  shut  down  this  1999
meeting  of  the  World  Trade  Organization  (WTO),
but  no  American  by  the  late  1990s  could  deny  that
developments  in  the  global  economy  reverberated  at
home. In that decade, Americans rediscovered a long-
standing truth: the United States was not an island, but
was linked in countless different ways to a global econ-
omy  and  society.  Economic  prosperity  in  the  post–
World War II decades had obscured for Americans this
fundamental reality (Figure 31.1).

Globalization  saw  the  rapid  spread  of  capitalism
around the world, huge increases in global trade and
commerce,  and  a  diffusion  of  communications  tech-
nology, including the Internet, that linked the world’s

WTO Demonstration, Seattle, 1999

In November 1999, an estimated 50,000 to 100,000 people from many states and foreign nations staged
an effective protest at a World Trade Organization (WTO) meeting in Seattle. The goals of the protesters
were diffuse; many feared that the trend toward a system of free (capitalist-run) trade would primarily
beneﬁt multinational corporations and would hurt both developing nations and the working classes in
the industrialized world. Protests have continued at subsequent meetings of the WTO and the World
Bank. Hector Mata/AFP/Getty Images.

