CHAPTER 31

  Confronting Global and National Dilemmas, 1989 to the Present  1005

FIGURE 31.1
Productivity, Family Income, and Wages,
1970–2004

This chart tells a complex and not altogether
happy story. The median hourly wages of
American workers (adjusted for inﬂation)
stagnated between 1970 and 1995. The rise in
median family income reﬂected the increasing
proportion of two-earner families, as more
married women entered the workforce. The
dramatic increases in productivity did not lead
to higher wages for workers. Rather, businesses
used those gains either to cut prices to compete
in the global marketplace or to reward owners,
shareholders, and, particularly, corporate
executives.

180

160

140

120

100

80

1973=100

’76

’80

’84

’88

’92

’96

’00

’04

Indexes of:
Productivity
Median family income*
Median hourly wages

Average annual changes

+3.8%

1973–95

1995–2000

2000–04

+2.5%

+2.2%

+1.4%

+1.5%

+1.0%

+0.5%

0

Median hourly wages

Productivity

Median family income

-0.9%

*Family income through 2003

people to one another in ways unimaginable a genera-
tion  earlier  (Thinking  Like  a  Historian,  p.  1006).
Suddenly,  the  United  States  faced  a  dizzying  array  of
opportunities  and  challenges,  both  at  home  and
abroad.  “Profound  and  powerful  forces  are  shaking
and remaking our world,” said a young President Bill
Clinton  in  his  first  inaugural  address  in  1993.  “The
urgent  question of  our  time  is  whether  we  can  make
change our friend and not our enemy.”

An  additional  question  remained,  however.  In
whose  interest  was  the  global  economy  structured?
Many of the Seattle activists took inspiration from the
five-point “Declaration for Global Democracy,” issued
by  the  human  rights  organization  Global  Exchange
during the WTO’s Seattle meeting. “Global trade and
investment,” the declaration demanded, “must not be
ends  in  themselves  but  rather  the  instruments  for
achieving  equitable  and  sustainable  development,
including  protections  for  workers  and  the  environ-
ment.”  The  declaration  also  addressed  inequality
among  nations,  calling  attention  to  who  benefitted
from globalization and who did not.

The Rise of the European Union
and China
During the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet
Union dominated the global balance of power. These
two  superpowers  oversaw  what  observers  called  a
bipolar world — two powerful poles, one capitalist and
the other communist, around which global geopolitics
were organized. Since the early 1990s, however, a mul-
tipolar world has emerged — with centers of power in
Europe,  Japan,  China,  and  the  United  States,  along
with  rising  regional  powers  such  as  India  and  Brazil
(America Compared, p. 1008).

In 1992, the nations of Western Europe created the
European Union (EU) and moved toward the creation
of  a  single  federal  state,  somewhat  like  the  United
States.  By  the  end  of  the  1990s,  the  European  Union
embraced more than twenty countries and 450 million
people — the  third-largest  population  in  the  world,
behind China and India — and accounted for a fifth of
all global imports and exports. In 2002, the EU intro-
duced a single currency, the euro, which soon rivaled

