T H I N K I N G   L I K E
A   H I S T O R I A N

Globalization: Its

Proponents and Its

Discontents

Globalization is perhaps one of the most commonly used, yet least understood,
concepts in our modern vocabulary. This chapter has explored how, while there
has long been an international, or global, dimension to trade, migration, and
other economic activity, there is nevertheless something distinct about the post–
Cold  War  global  order.  Economic  integration  and  communication  networking
have created new opportunities for millions of people. Yet those same processes
may not beneﬁt all equally. The following documents offer different perspec-
tives on the broad process called globalization.

1.  Interview with Petra Mata, Mexican immigrant to
the United States, 2003. An immigrant from a low-
wage country who was “insourced,” Mata worked
as a low-paid garment worker until she lost her job
in the United States because it was outsourced —
sent abroad to workers paid even less.

My name is Petra Mata. I was born in Mexico. I have
completed no more than the sixth grade in school. In
1969, my husband and I came to the U.S. believing we
would find better opportunities for our children and
ourselves. We first arrived without documents, then
became legal, and finally became citizens. For years I
moved from job to job until I was employed in 1976
by the most popular company in the market, Levi
Strauss & Company. I earned $9.73 an hour and also
had vacation and sick leave. Levi’s provided me and
my family with a stable situation, and in return I was a
loyal employee and worked there for fourteen years.

On January 16, 1990, Levi’s closed its plant in San
Antonio, Texas, where I had been working, leaving 1,150
workers unemployed, a majority of whom were Mexican-
American women. The company moved its factory to
Costa Rica. . . .

As a result of being laid off, I personally lost my house,

my method of transportation, and the tranquility of my
home. My family and I had to face new problems. My
husband was forced to look for a second job on top of
the one he already had. He worked from seven in the
morning to six at night. Our reality was very difficult.
At that time, I had not the slightest idea what free trade
was or meant. . . .

Our governments make agreements behind closed
doors without participation from the working persons
who are most affected by these decisions — decisions that
to my knowledge only benefit large corporations and
those in positions of power.

1006

2.  iPhone global supply chain figure, 2011.

E.U. profits 1.1%

Chinese labor costs 1.8%

Non-Apple U.S. profits 2.4%

Non-Chinese labor costs
3.5%

S. Korea profits
4.7%

Unidentified profits
5.3%

Japan profits .5%

Taiwan profits .5%

Apple profits
58.5%

Cost of materials
21.9%

FIGURE 31.2

3.  Seattle Chapter, National Lawyers Guild, “Bringing
in an Undemocratic Institution Brings an Undemo-
cratic Response,” 2000.

Many of the businesses that most promote the WTO
[World Trade Organization] and its allied institutions
rely on undemocratic practices to promote their business
interest. In recent years these policies have included not
only monopolistic business practices but also outright
interference with local governments. Frequently, to
promote the interests of business, a militaristic type
of government is either promoted, or even created. The
effects these governments and their policies have on the
citizenry of these nations are disastrous. Farms and for-
ests are ruined and denuded. Low cost toxic waste dumps
are created near population centers to service skyrocket-
ing debts. . . .

