The WTO was nominally chartered as a dispute reso-
lution organization. The problem is it is an organization
with no real oversight or accountability, and a process
that favors the most powerful corporations.

4.  World Trade Organization press release, 2000.

■  Extreme poverty is a huge problem. 1.2 billion

people survive on less than a dollar a day. A fur-
ther 1.6 billion, more than a quarter of the world’s
population, make do with one to two dollars a day.

■  To alleviate poverty, developing economies need
to grow faster, and the poor need to benefit from
this growth. Trade can play an important part in
reducing poverty, because it boosts economic
growth and the poor tend to benefit from that
faster growth.

■  The study finds that, in general, living standards
in developing countries are not catching up with
those in developed countries. But some developing
countries are catching up. What distinguishes them
is their openness to trade. The countries that are
catching up with rich ones are those that are open
to trade; and the more open they are, the faster
they are converging.

5.  Stuart Carlson, political cartoon from the

Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel, 2005.

6.  Former president Bill Clinton, speech at Guildhall,

London, 2006.

I spent a lot of time working on globalization when I was
president, coming to terms with the fundamental fact of
interdependence that goes far beyond economics: open
border, easy travel, easy immigration, free flow of money
as well as people, products, and services. I tried to figure
out how to maximize the dynamism of global interdepen-
dence and still broaden its impact in terms of economics
and opportunity. The one thing that I am quite sure of is
that interdependence is not a choice, it’s not a policy, it is
the inevitable condition of our time. So, divorce is not an
option. . . .

Therefore, the mission of the moment clearly is to
build up the positive and reduce the negative forces of
global interdependence in a way that enables us to keep
score in the right way. Are people going to be better off,
will our children have a better chance, will we be more
united than divided?

Sources: (1) From Shafted: Free Trade and America’s Working Poor, by Christine Ahn
(Food First Books, 2003). Reprinted by permission of the Institute for Food and
Development Policy, 398 60th Street, Oakland, CA 94618.; (2) Kenneth L. Kraemer,
Greg Linden, and Jason Dedrick, “Capturing Value in Global Networks: Apple’s iPad
and iPhone” (Paul Merage School of Business, University of California, Irvine, July
2011). Used by permission of the authors; (3) Seattle Chapter, National Lawyers Guild,
“Bringing in an Undemocratic Institution Brings an Undemocratic Response,” July 5,
2000, ii, 5; (4) WTO press release, June 13, 2000, quoting a WTO Special Study No. 5,
“Trade, Income Disparity, and Poverty,” June 2000. Used by permission of the World
Trade Organization; (6) collegeofpublicspeaking.co.uk/Clinton-London-2006.html.

Stuart Carlson © 2005 Milwaukee Sentinel. Reprinted with permission of
UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

1.  Free trade means that goods can move between coun-
tries without restriction or taxation (such as tariffs or
duties). Compare sources 1, 3, 5, and 6. How do these
different sources explain the effects of freer trade across
the globe? How would you interpret the WTO’s opti-
mism about free trade alongside Petra Mata’s personal
experience of displacement?

2.  How is increased global communication important to

the trade relationships described in source 2? According
to source 4, what are some other effects associated with
the trade relationships shown here?

3.  What tension in globalization is the cartoonist in source
5 attempting to capture? What kind of change over time
has the cartoonist identiﬁed?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Based on this chapter’s discussion of globalization, and
using the above documents, write an essay in which you
examine the economic effects of recent global integration.
In particular, use your essay to deﬁne globalization and to
outline some of its potential positive and negative effects.

1007

