A M E R I C A
C O M P A R E D

Global Trade,

1960–2009

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

)
s
r
a
l
l
o
d

.

.

S
U
n
i

s
n
o
i
l
l
i
r
t
(

s
t
r
o
p
m

I

One of the major consequences of economic globalization is an increase in trade
among  nations.  The  ﬁgures  below  show  imports  and  exports  for  four  of  the
world’s largest economies.

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

)
s
r
a
l
l
o
d

.

.

S
U
n
i

s
n
o
i
l
l
i
r
t
(

s
t
r
o
p
x
E

0
0

0
6
9
1

5
6
9
1

0
7
9
1

5
7
9
1

5
8
9
1

0
8
9
1
U.S.
China

0
5
9
9
9
9
1
1
Germany
Japan

0
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

0

0
6
9
1

5
6
9
1

0
7
9
1

5
7
9
1

5
8
9
1

0
8
9
1
U.S.
China

0
5
9
9
9
9
1
1
Germany
Japan

0
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

FIGURE 31.3
Imports, 1960–2009

FIGURE 31.4
Exports, 1960–2009

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

1.  Notice how U.S. imports rose at roughly the same rate as

2.  China’s exports rose spectacularly after the 1990s. Germany

those of other countries until the 1970s. What accounts for
the acceleration of U.S. imports thereafter?

increased its exports in this period dramatically as well. What
evidence do you see here for increasing competition for the
United States in a globalizing economy?

the dollar and the Japanese yen as a major international
currency  (Map  31.1).  Militarily,  however,  the  EU
remained a secondary power. An economic juggernaut
and trading rival with a suspicion of warfare, the EU
presented  a  number  of  new  dilemmas  for  American
officials.

So did China, a vast nation of 1.3 billion people that
was  the  world’s  fastest-rising  economic  power  in  the
first decade of the twenty-first century. Between 2000
and 2008, China quadrupled its gross domestic prod-
uct  (GDP).  Economic  growth  rates  during  those
years were consistently near 10 percent — higher than
the  United  States  achieved  during  its  periods  of

furious  economic  growth  in  the  1950s  and  1960s.
Although  still  governed  by  the  Communist  Party,
China embraced capitalism, and its factories produced
inexpensive  products  for  export,  which  Americans
eagerly  purchased — everything  from  children’s  toys
and  television  sets  to  clothing,  household  appliances,
and video games. To maintain this symbiotic relation-
ship, China deliberately kept its currency weak against
the American dollar, ensuring that its exports remained
cheap in the United States.

Beneficial to American consumers in the short run,
the implications of this relationship for the future may
be  less  promising.  Two  such  implications  stand  out.

1008

