CHAPTER 31

  Confronting Global and National Dilemmas, 1989 to the Present  1009

MAP 31.1
Growth of the European Community,
1951–2005

The European Community (EU) began in
the 1950s as a loose organization of Western
European nations. Over the course of the fol-
lowing decades, it created stronger common
institutions, such as the European Parliament
in Strasbourg, the EU Commission in Brussels,
and the Court of Justice in Luxembourg. With
the collapse of communism, the EU has
expanded to include the nations of Eastern
and Central Europe. It now includes twenty-
eight nations and over 500 million people.

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

ICELAND

Original members of the
European Economic Union
Became members 1973–1995
Became members in 2004–2013
Applying for membership

NORWAY

FINLAND

SWEDEN

ESTONIA

N

E

W

S

N.
Ireland

IRELAND

UNITED
KINGDOM

North
Sea

DENMARK

Baltic Sea

LATVIA

LITHUANIA

R U S S I A N
F E D E R A T I O N

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

L
A
G
U
T
R
O
P

SPAIN

NETH.

RUSSIA

BELARUS

BEL.

GERMANY

POLAND

LUX.

FRANCE

CZECH
REP.

LIECH.

SLOVAKIA

SWITZ.

AUSTRIA

SLOVENIA

HUNGARY

CROATIA

SERBIA

BOSNIA-
HERZEGOVINA

ITALY

UKRAINE

MOLDOVA

ROMANIA

BULGARIA

Black Sea

MONTENEGRO

KOSOVO
MACEDONIA

ALBANIA

GREECE

TURKEY

MOROCCO

ALGERIA

TUNISIA

MALTA

Mediterranean Sea

CYPRUS

First, as more and more goods that Americans buy are
produced  in  China,  the  manufacturing  base  in  the
United  States  continues  to  shrink,  costing  jobs  and
adversely  affecting  communities.  Second,  China  has
kept  its  currency  low  against  the  dollar  primarily  by
purchasing American debt. China now owns nearly 25
percent of total U.S. debt, more than any other nation.
Many  economists  believe  that  it  is  unwise  to  allow  a
single country to wield so much influence over the U.S.
currency  supply.  Should  this  relationship  continue
unchanged, Americans may find their manufacturing
sector  contracting  even  more  severely  in  the  coming
decades.

An Era of Globalization
Americans have long depended on foreign markets to
which they export their goods and have long received
imported products and immigrants from other coun-
tries.  But  the  intensity  of  international  exchange  has
varied  over  time.  The  end  of  the  Cold  War  shattered
barriers  that  had  restrained  international  trade  and
impeded  capitalist  development  of  vast  areas  of  the
world.  New  communications  systems — satellites,
fiber-optic cables, global positioning networks — were
shrinking  the  world’s  physical  spaces  to  a  degree

unimaginable at the beginning of
the  twentieth  century.  Perhaps
most  important,  global  financial
markets  became  integrated  to  an
unprecedented  extent,  allowing
investment  capital  to  “flow”  into
and out of nations and around the
world in a matter of moments.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
What were the major con-
sequences for the United
States of the economic rise
of China and the European
Union?

International  Organizations  and  Corporations
International  organizations,  many  of  them  created  in
the wake of World War II, set the rules for capitalism’s
worldwide expansion. During the final decades of the
Cold  War,  the  leading  capitalist  industrial  nations
formed  the  Group  of  Seven  (G7)  to  manage  global
economic  policy.  Russia  joined  in  1997,  creating  the
Group  of  Eight  (G8).  The  G8  nations — the  United
States, Britain, Germany, France, Italy, Japan, Canada,
and Russia — largely controlled the major international
financial  organizations:  the  World  Bank,  the  Inter-
national  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  and  the  General
Agreement  on  Tariffs  and  Trade  (GATT).  In  1995,
GATT  evolved  into  the  World  Trade  Organization
(WTO),  with  nearly  150  participating  nations  that
regulate and formalize trade agreements with member
states.

