1010

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

COMPARE AND
CONTRAST
What were the poten-
tial beneﬁts and risks of
globalization to the United
States and other countries?

As  globalization  accelerated,
so did the integration of regional
economies.  To  offset  the  eco-
nomic clout of the European bloc,
in 1993 the United States, Canada,
and  Mexico  signed  the  North
American  Free  Trade  Agreement
(NAFTA). This treaty, as  ratified by the U.S. Congress,
envisioned  the  eventual  creation  of  a  free-trade  zone
covering all of North America. In East Asia, the capi-
talist  nations  of  Japan,  South  Korea,  Taiwan,  and
Singapore  consulted  on  economic  policy;  as  China
developed  a  quasi-capitalist  economy  and  became  a
major  exporter  of  manufactures,  its  Communist-led
government joined their deliberations.

International  organizations  set  the  rules,  but  glo-
balization  was  made  possible  by  the  proliferation  of
multinational  corporations  (MNCs).  In  1970,  there

were  7,000  corporations  with  offices  and  factories  in
multiple countries; by 2000, the number had exploded
to 63,000. Many of the most powerful MNCs were, and
continue  to  be,  based  in  the  United  States.  Walmart,
the biggest American retailer, is also one of the world’s
largest corporations, with 1,200 stores in other nations
and more than $400 billion in sales. Apple, maker of
the iPhone and iPad, grew spectacularly in the 2000s
and now has more than $60 billion annually in global
sales. The McDonald’s restaurant chain had 1,000 out-
lets  outside  the  United  States  in  1980;  twenty  years
later,  there  were  nearly  13,000,  and  “McWorld”  had
become a popular shorthand term for globalization.

Globalization was driven by more than a quest for
new  markets.  Corporations  also  sought  ever-cheaper
sources of labor. Many American MNCs closed their
factories  in  the  United  States  and  outsourced  manu-
facturing  jobs  to  plants  in  Mexico,  Eastern  Europe,

A Nike Factory in China

In 2005, Nike produced its shoes and sportswear at 124 plants in China; additional factories were located
in other low-wage countries. Most of the Chinese plants were run by subcontractors, who housed the
workers — mostly women between the ages of sixteen and twenty-ﬁve — in crowded dormitories. The
wages were low, about $3 a day, but more than the women could earn if they remained in their rural
villages. AP Images.

