CHAPTER 31

  Confronting Global and National Dilemmas, 1989 to the Present  1011

and especially Asia. The athletic sportswear firm Nike
was  a  prime  example.  By  2005,  Nike  had  established
700  factories  worldwide  that  employed  more  than
650,000  workers,  most  of  whom  received  low  wages,
endured harsh working conditions, and had no health
or  pension  benefits.  Highly  skilled  jobs  were  out-
sourced as well.

Financial Deregulation  One of the principal differ-
ences between this new era of globalization and previ-
ous eras has been the opening of national financial and
currency  markets  to  investment  from  around  the
world. The United States and Britain led the way. Both
countries  came  under  the  sway  of  powerful  political
forces in the 1980s calling for the total deregulation of
banks, brokerage houses, investment firms, and finan-
cial markets — letting the free market replace govern-
ment oversight. Together, the United States and Britain
led  a  quiet  revolution  in  which  investment  markets
around the world were gradually set free.

Financial  deregulation  led  to  spectacular  profits
for investors but produced a more fragile, crash-prone
global economy. On the profit side, financial-industry
profits  in  the  United  States  rose  from  less  than

10 percent of total business profits in the 1950s to more
than 40 percent beginning in the 1990s. But the costs
were  becoming  clear  as  well:  the  bankruptcy  of  the
American savings and loan industry in the 1980s; the
“lost  decade”  in  Japan  in  the  1990s;  the  near  bank-
ruptcy of Russia in the late 1990s and of Argentina in
2001;  the  1997  Asian  financial  crisis,  centered  in
Thailand and Indonesia; and the collapse of nearly the
entire  global  economy  in  2008  (p.  1030).  These  and
other episodes dramatized the extraordinary risks that
financial globalization has introduced.

Revolutions in Technology
The  technological  advances  of  the  1980s  and  1990s
changed the character of everyday life for millions of
Americans,  linking  them  with  a  global  information
and  media  environment  unprecedented  in  world
history. Not since television was introduced to Amer-
ican homes in the years following World War II had
technology  so  profoundly  changed  the  way  people
lived their lives. Personal computers, cell phones and
smartphones, the Internet and the World Wide Web,
and  other  electronic  devices  and  systems  altered

Internet Versus Newspapers

Between 2000 and 2010, dozens of large and medium-sized newspapers went out of business, their once-
robust readership drained away by the convenience of news available for free on the Internet. In 2009, the
Seattle Post-Intelligencer newspaper ceased print publication and became an online-only news source. In this
photo, the paper’s news-boxes sit empty, an ominous sign of the struggling newspaper business in the early
2000s. © Bettmann/Corbis.

