1012

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

work,  leisure,  and  access  to  knowledge  in  stunning
ways. Like unimpeded trade, these advances in com-
munications  and  personal  technologies  enhanced
globalization.

During the 1990s, personal computers, which had
emerged in the late 1970s, grew even more significant
with the spread of the Internet and the World Wide Web.
Like the computer itself, the Internet was the product
of military-based research. During the late 1960s, the
U.S. Department of Defense, in conjunction with the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, began develop-
ing a decentralized computer network, the  Advanced
Research  Projects  Agency  Network  (ARPANET).  The
Inter net, which grew out of the ARPANET, was soon
used  by  government  scientists,  academic  specialists,
and  military  contractors  to  exchange  data,  informa-
tion,  and  electronic  mail  (e-mail).  By  the  1980s,  the
Internet had spread to universities, businesses, and the
general public.

The debut in 1991 of the graphics-based World Wide
Web — a  collection  of  servers  that  allowed  access  to
millions of documents, pictures, and other materials —
enhanced the popular appeal and commercial possibil-
ities of the Internet. By 2011, 78 percent of all Americans
and more than two billion people worldwide used the
Internet to send messages and view information. Bus-
inesses  used  the  World  Wide  Web  to  sell  their prod-
ucts  and  services;  e-commerce  transactions  totaled
$114 billion in 2003, $172 billion in 2005, and neared

$500 billion in 2010. The Web proved instantly demo-
cratic,  providing  ordinary  people  with  easy  access  to
knowledge.

Politics and Partisanship
in a New Era
Standing  at  the  podium  at  the  1992  Republican
National  Convention,  his  supporters  cheering  by  the
thousands,  Patrick  Buchanan  did  not  mince  words.
Buchanan  was  a  former  speechwriter  for  President
Richard  Nixon  and  a  White  House  aide  to  President
Ronald  Reagan,  and  despite  having  lost  the  nomina-
tion  for  president,  he  still  hoped  to  shape  the  party’s
message to voters. This election, he told the audience —
including millions watching on television — “is about
what  we  stand  for  as  Americans.”  Citing  Demo cratic
support for abortion rights and the rights of lesbians
and gay men, Buchanan claimed there was “a religious
war going on in our country for the soul of America.” It
was, he emphasized, “a culture war.”

Buchanan’s  war  was  another  name  for  a  long-
standing political struggle, dating to the 1920s, between
religious  traditionalists  and  secular  liberals  (Chap-
ter 22). This time, however, Americans struggled over
these questions in the long shadow of the sixties, which
had taken on an exaggerated meaning in the nation’s

New Immigrants

In the early years of the 2000s,
more immigrants lived in the
United States than at any time
since the ﬁrst decades of the
twentieth century. Most came
from Asia, Latin America, and
Africa. Many, like those pictured
here, started small businesses
that helped revive the economies
of urban and suburban neigh-
borhoods across the country.
© Bettmann/Corbis.

