CHAPTER 31

  Confronting Global and National Dilemmas, 1989 to the Present  1013

s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
n
i

s
r
e
b
m
u
N

700
600
500
400
375
350
325
300
275
250
225
200
175
150
125
100
75
50
25
0

1921

1925

1930

1953

1970

1979

1989

2000

Eastern and Southern Europe

Northwestern and Central Europe

Latin America and Caribbean

Asia

FIGURE 31.5
American Immigration, 1920–2000

Legislation inspired by nativism slowed the inﬂux of immigrants after 1920, as did the dislocations
brought on by economic depression and war in the 1930s and 1940s. Note the high rate of non-
European immigration since the 1970s, the result of new eligibility rules in the Immigration Act of
1965 (Chapter 28). The dramatic increase since 1980 in the number of migrants from Latin America
and Asia reﬂects American economic prosperity, traditionally a magnet for migrants, and the rapid
acceleration of illegal immigration.

politics. Against the backdrop of globalization, Amer-
ican  politics  in  the  1990s  and  early  2000s  careened
back  and  forth  between  contests  over  divisive  social
issues and concern over the nation’s economic future.

An Increasingly Plural Society
Exact estimates vary, but demographers predict that at
some point between 2040 and 2050 the United States
will  become  a  “majority-minority”  nation:  No  single
ethnic or racial group will be in the numerical majority.
This  is  already  the  case  in  California,  where  in  2010
African Americans, Latinos, and Asians together con-
stituted  a  majority  of  the  state’s  residents.  As  this
unmistakable  trend  became  apparent  in  the  1990s,  it
fueled renewed debates over ethnic and racial identity
and over public policies such as affirmative action.

New Immigrants  According to the Census Bureau,
the population of the United States grew from 203 mil-
lion in 1970 to 280 million in 2000 (American Voices,
p.  1016).  Of  that  77-million-person  increase,  immi-
grants  accounted  for  28  million,  with  legal  entrants

numbering  21  million  and  illegal  entrants  adding
another 7 million (Figure 31.5). As a result, by 2000, 26
percent of California’s population was foreign-born, as
was 20 percent of New York’s and 17 percent each of
New  Jersey’s  and  Florida’s.  Relatively  few  immigrants
came from Europe, which had dominated immigration
to the United States between 1880 and 1924. The over-
whelming  majority — some  25  million — now  came
from Latin America (16 million) and East Asia (9 mil-
lion) (Map 31.2).

This  extraordinary  inflow  of  immigrants  was  the
unintended result of the Immigration and Nationality
Act of 1965, one of the less well-known but most influ-
ential pieces of Great Society legislation. Known as the
Hart-Celler  Act,  the  legislation  eliminated  the  1924
quota system, which had favored Northern Europe. In
its place, Congress created a more equal playing field
among  nations  and  a  slightly  higher  total  limit  on
immigration. The legislation also included provisions
that eased the entry of immigrants who possessed skills
in high demand in the United States. Finally, a provi-
sion with far-reaching implications was included in the
new law: immediate family members of those already

