1014

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

MAP 31.2
Hispanic and Asian Populations, 2000

In 2000, people of Hispanic descent
made up more than 11 percent of the
American population, and they now
outnumber African Americans as the
largest minority group. Asian Americans
accounted for an additional 4 percent
of the population. Demographers
predict that by the year 2050 only
about half of the U.S. population
will be composed of non-Hispanic
whites. Note the high percentage
of Hispanics and Asians in California
and certain other states.

WASH.

MONTANA

NORTH
DAKOTA

MINN.

OREGON

IDAHO

CALIF.

NEVADA

Sacramento
Stockton
San Francisco

Salinas

Fresno

Visalia

Bakersfield

UTAH

ARIZONA

SOUTH
DAKOTA

WIS.

MICH.

WYOMING

NEBRASKA

Denver

IOWA

Chicago

ILL.

IND.

OHIO

COLORADO

KANSAS

MO.

KY.

Albuquerque

OKLAHOMA

TENN.

ARK.

Los Angeles

San Diego

Phoenix

Tucson

NEW
MEXICO

VT.

MAINE

N.H.
Boston

MASS.
R.I.
CONN.

New York
N.J.
DEL.

Washington, D.C.

N.Y.

PA.
Philadelphia
MD.

W.
VA. VA.

N.C.

S.C.

El Paso

TEXAS

LA.

Austin

San Antonio

Houston

Laredo

McAllen

Corpus
Christi

Brownsville

HAWAII

ALASKA

0

0

400

800 miles

400

800 kilometers

MISS. ALA.

GA.

FLA.

Tampa

Cities with Major
Latino Population

3,000,000–5,000,000

2,000,000–3,000,000

500,000–2,000,000
100,000–500,000

Miami

Percent
of State
Population
41
30–36
18–23
12–17
6–11
0–5

WASH.

OREGON

NEV.

CALIF.

MONTANA

NORTH
DAKOTA

MINN.

IDAHO

WYOMING

SOUTH
DAKOTA

WIS.

MICH.

VT.

MAINE

N.H.

MASS.

R.I.
CT.

N.Y.

PA.

NEBRASKA

IOWA

UTAH

COLORADO

KANSAS

MO.

ARIZONA

NEW
MEXICO

OKLAHOMA

ARK.

N.J.
DEL.
MD.

OHIO

IND.

ILL.

KY.

TENN.

W.
VA.

VA.

N.C.

S.C.

ALA.

GA.

MISS.

TEXAS

LA.

FLA.

HAWAII

ALASKA

States with
Major Asian Population

Over 2,000,000

Over 500,000

Over 200,000

Over 100,000

Percent
of State
Population
64
12
4–6
2–3
Less than 2

legally resident in the United States were admitted out-
side of the total numerical limit.

American  residents  from  Latin  America  and  the
Caribbean  were  best  positioned  to  take  advantage  of
the family provision. Millions of Mexicans came to the
United States to join their families, and U.S. residents
from El Salvador and Guatemala — tens of thousands
of  whom  had  arrived  seeking  sanctuary  or  asylum

during the civil wars of the 1980s — and the Dominican
Republic  now  brought  their  families  to  join  them.
Nationally, there were now more Latinos than African
Americans.  Many  of  these  immigrants  profoundly
shaped the emerging global economy by sending sub-
stantial portions of their earnings, called remittances,
back  to  family  members  in  their  home  countries.  In
2006,  for  instance,  workers  in  the  United  States  sent

