CHAPTER 31

  Confronting Global and National Dilemmas, 1989 to the Present  1015

$23 billion to Mexico, a massive remittance flow that con-
stituted Mexico’s third-largest source of foreign exchange.
Asian  immigrants  came  largely  from  China,  the
Philippines, South Korea, India, and Pakistan. In addi-
tion, 700,000 refugees came to the United States from
Southeast  Asia  (Vietnam,  Laos,  and  Cambodia)  after
the  Vietnam  War.  This  immigration  signaled  more
than  new  flows  of  people  into  the  United  States.
Throughout much of its history, the United States had
oriented itself toward the Atlantic. Indeed, at the end of
the  nineteenth  century,  American  secretary  of  state
John Hay observed, “The Mediterranean is the ocean
of the past; the Atlantic the ocean of the present.” He
added,  presciently,  “The  Pacific  [is]  the  ocean  of  the
future.”  By  the  last  decades  of  the  twentieth  century,
Hay’s  future  had  arrived.  As  immigration  from  Asia
increased,  as  Japan  and  China  grew  more  influential
economically,  and  as  more  and  more  transnational
trade crossed the Pacific, commentators on both sides
of the ocean began speaking of the Pacific Rim as an
important new region.

Multiculturalism and Its Critics  Most new immi-
grants  arrived  under  the  terms  of  the  1965  law.  But
those who entered without legal documentation stirred
political controversy. After twenty years under the new
law, there were three to five million immigrants with-
out  legal  status.  In  1986,  to  remedy  this  situation,
Congress passed the Immigration Reform and Control
Act. The law granted citizenship to many of those who
had arrived illegally, provided incentives for employers
not to hire undocumented immigrants, and increased
surveillance along the border with Mexico. Immigration
critics persisted, however. In 1992, Patrick Buchanan,
then  campaigning  for  the  Republican  presidential
nomination, warned Americans that their country was
“undergoing  the  greatest  invasion  in  its  history,  a
migration  of  millions  of  illegal  aliens  a  year  from
Mexico.”  Many  states  took  immigration  matters  into
their  own  hands.  In  1994,  for  instance,  Californians
approved Proposition 187, a ballot initiative that barred
illegal aliens from public schools, nonemergency care
at  public  health  clinics,  and  all  other  state  social  ser-
vices. The proposed law declared that U.S. citizens have
a “right to the protection of their government from any
person  or  persons  entering  this  country  unlawfully,”
but  after  five  years  in  federal  court,  the  controversial
measure was ruled unconstitutional.

To see a longer excerpt of Proposition 187, along
with other primary sources from this period, see
Sources for America’s History.

Debates over post-1965 immigration looked a great
deal like conflicts in the early decades of the century.
Then, many native-born white Protestants worried that
the  largely  Jewish  and  Catholic  immigrants  from
Southern  and  Eastern  Europe,  along  with  African
American migrants leaving the South, could not assim-
ilate  and  threatened  the  “purity”  of  the  nation.
Although  the  conflicts  looked  the  same,  the  cultural
paradigm  had  shifted.  In  the  earlier  era,  the  melting
pot — a  term  borrowed  from  the  title  of  a  1908
play — became the metaphor for how American soci-
ety would accommodate its newfound diversity. Some
native-born  Americans  found  solace  in  the  melting-
pot concept because it implied that a single “American”
culture  would  predominate.  In  the  1990s,  however,  a
different concept, multiculturalism, emerged to define
social  diversity.  Americans,  this  concept  suggested,
were  not  a  single  people  into  whom  others  melted;
rather, they comprised a diverse set of ethnic and racial
groups  living  and  working  together.  A  shared  set  of
public  values  held  the  multicultural  society  together,
even as different groups maintained unique practices
and traditions.

Critics,  however,  charged  that  multiculturalism
perpetuated ethnic chauvinism and conferred prefer-
ential  treatment  on  minority  groups.  Many  govern-
ment  policies,  as  well  as  a  large  number  of  private
employers, for instance, continued to support affirma-
tive  action  programs  designed  to  bring  African
Americans and Latinos into public- and private-sector
jobs and universities in larger numbers. Conservatives
argued that such governmental programs were deeply
flawed  because  they  promoted  “reverse  discrimina-
tion” against white men and women and resulted in the
selection and promotion of less qualified applicants for
jobs and educational advancement.

California stood at the center of the debate. In 1995,
under pressure from Republican governor Pete Wilson,
the  regents  of  the  University  of  California  scrapped
their  twenty-year-old  policy  of  affirmative  action.  A
year later, California voters approved Proposition 209,
which outlawed affirmative action in state employment
and public education. At the height of the 1995 contro-
versy, President Bill Clinton delivered a major speech
defending affirmative action. He reminded Americans
that  Richard  Nixon,  a  Republican  president,  had
endorsed affirmative action, and he concluded by say-
ing the nation should “mend it,” not “end it.” However,
as in the Bakke decision of the 1970s (Chapter 29), it
was the U.S. Supreme Court that spoke loudest on the
subject.  In  two  parallel  2003  cases,  the  Court  invali-
dated one affirmative action plan at the University of

