A M E R I C A N
V O I C E S

Immigration After

1965: Its Defenders

and Critics

As we have seen in this chapter, the immigration law passed by Congress in 1965
combined with global developments to shift the ﬂows of people seeking entry
to the United States. More and more immigrants came from Latin America, the
Caribbean, Asia, and Africa. Immigration has always been politically controver-
sial, but in the 1990s a renewed, and often polarized, debate over immigration
emerged.

John F. Kennedy
A Nation of Immigrants, 1964

This  selection  is  from  a  revised,  and  posthumously  pub-
lished, version of a book Kennedy originally published in
1958.

Immigration policy should be generous; it should be fair;
it should be flexible. With such a policy we can turn to the
world, and to our own past with clean hands and a clean
conscience. Such a policy would be a reaffirmation of old
principles. It would be an expression of our agreement
with George Washington that “The bosom of America
is open to receive not only the opulent and respectable
stranger, but the oppressed and persecuted of all nations
and religions; whom we shall welcome to a participation
of all our rights and privileges, if by decency and propri-
ety of conduct they appear to merit the enjoyment.”

Source: Nicholas Capaldi, ed., Immigration: Debating the Issues (Amherst, NY:
Prometheus Books, 1997), 128.

Roy Beck
“A Nation of (Too Many) Immigrants?” 1996

Boy Beck is a former journalist who became an activist for
immigration reduction.

Since 1970, more than 30 million foreign citizens and their
descendants have been added to the local communities
and labor pools of the United States. It is the numerical
equivalent of having relocated within our borders the
entire present population of all Central American
countries.

Demographic change on such a massive scale —
primarily caused by the increased admission of legal
immigrants — inevitably has created winners and losers
among Americans. Based on opinion polls, it appears that
most Americans consider themselves net losers and believe
that the United States has become “a nation of too many
immigrants.”

What level of immigration is best for America, and
of real help to the world? Although we often hear that
1016

the United States is a nation of immigrants, we seldom
ask just what that means. It can be difficult to ask tough
questions about immigration when we see nostalgic
images of Ellis Island, recall our own families’ coming
to America, or encounter a new immigrant who is striv-
ing admirably to achieve the American dream.

But tough questions about immigration can no
longer be avoided as we enter a fourth decade of unprec-
edentedly high immigration and struggle with its impact
on our job markets, on the quality of life and social
fabric of our communities, and on the state of the
environment. . . .

The task before the nation in setting a fair level
of immigration is not about race or some vision of a
homogenous white America; it is about protecting and
enhancing the United States’ unique experiment in
democracy for all Americans, including recent immi-
grants, regardless of their particular ethnicity. It is time
to confront the true costs and benefits of immigration
numbers, which have skyrocketed beyond our society’s
ability to handle them successfully.

Source: From The Case Against Immigration: The Moral, Economic, Social, and Environ-
mental Reasons for Reducing U.S. Immigration Back to Traditional Levels, by Roy H. Beck
(New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1996). Used by permission of the author.

Vernon M. Briggs Jr. and Stephen Moore
“Still an Open Door?” 1994

Two academic policy analysts weigh in on the immigration
debate.

Immigrants are certainly not an unmixed blessing. When
the newcomers first arrive, they impose short-term costs
on the citizenry. Because immigration means more people,
they cause more congestion of our highways, a more
crowded housing market, and longer waiting lines
in stores and hospitals. In states such as California,
immigrants’ children are heavy users of an already
overburdened public school system, and so on. Some
immigrants abuse the welfare system, which means that
tax dollars from Americans are transferred to immigrant
populations. Los Angeles County officials estimate that

