immigrants’ use of county services costs the local govern-
ment hundreds of millions of dollars each year. . . .

The benefits of immigration, however, are manifold.
Perhaps the most important benefit is that immigrants
come to the United States with critically needed talents,
energies, and ambitions that serve as an engine for eco-
nomic progress and help the United States retain economic
and geopolitical leadership. Because for most of the world’s
immigrants, America is their first choice, the United States
is in a unique position to select the most brilliant and inven-
tive minds from the United Kingdom, Canada, China,
Korea, India, Ireland, Mexico, Philippines, Russia, Taiwan,
and other nations. Because most immigrants are not poor,
tired, huddled masses, but rather are above the average of
their compatriots in skill and education levels, the immi-
gration process has a highly beneficial self-selection
component, a skimming of the cream of the best workers
and top brainpower from the rest of the world.

Source: Vernon M. Briggs Jr. and Stephen Moore, Still an Open Door? U.S. Immigration
Policy and the American Economy (Washington, DC: The American University Press,
1994).

Now, these are young people who study in our
schools, they play in our neighborhoods, they’re friends
with our kids, they pledge allegiance to our flag. They are
Americans in their heart, in their minds, in every single
way but one: on paper. They were brought to this country
by their parents, sometimes even as infants, and often
have no idea that they’re undocumented until they apply
for a job or a driver’s license or a college scholarship.
Put yourself in their shoes. Imagine you’ve done
everything right your entire life, studied hard, worked
hard, maybe even graduated at the top of your class, only
to suddenly face the threat of deportation to a country
that you know nothing about, with a language that you
may not even speak.

That’s what gave rise to the Dream Act. It says that if
your parents brought you here as a child, you’ve been here
for five years and you’re willing to go to college or serve in
our military, you can one day earn your citizenship. And
I’ve said time and time and time again to Congress
that — send me the Dream Act, put it on my desk, and I
will sign it right away. . . .

Source: New York Times, June 15, 2012.

President Barack Obama
June 15, 2012, Announcement at the
White House Rose Garden

In  2012  the  president  announced  a  new  policy  allowing
many immigrants to avoid deportation and apply for work
authorization.

This morning, Secretary Napolitano [Secretary of
Department of Homeland Security] announced new
actions my administration will take to mend our nation’s
immigration policy, to make it more fair, more efficient
and more just, specifically for certain young people some-
times called DREAMers.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS
1.  Compare and contrast the different views on immigra-
tion presented here. What are the pros and cons of
immigration?

2.  Does the debate over immigration depend on whether
immigrants are pictured as skilled and educated or
unskilled and poor? Explain why it should or shouldn’t.

3.  The Dream Act that President Obama mentions was

stalled in Congress in 2012. What kinds of appeals does
he make on behalf of immigrants? How do they com-
pare with Kennedy’s remarks?

1017

