1018

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

English Only

Not everyone was pleased with
the new inﬂux of immigrants.
Anti-immigrant movements
arose in various states, especially
those along the Mexican border.
In 1998, conservative activist Ron
Unz sponsored Proposition 227
in California. The measure, which
banned bilingual education in
public schools, passed by a wide
margin. In this photo, Unz delivers
a speech supporting Proposition
227 to an audience in Los Angeles.
AP Images.

Michigan  but  allowed  racial  preference  policies  that
promoted  a  “diverse”  student  body.  Thus  diversity
became the law of the land, the constitutionally accept-
able basis for affirmative action. The policy had been
narrowed but preserved.

Additional  anxieties  about  a  multicultural  nation
centered on language. In 1998, Silicon Valley software
entrepreneur  Ron  Unz  sponsored  a  California  initia-
tive calling for an end to bilingual education in public
schools. Unz argued that bilingual education had failed
because it did not adequately prepare Spanish-speaking
students  to  succeed  in  an  English-speaking  society.
The  state’s  white,  Anglo  residents  largely  approved
of  the  measure;  most  Mexican
Ameri can,  Asian  American,  and
civil rights organizations opposed
it.  When  Unz’s  measure,  Prop-
osition 227, passed with a healthy
61 percent majority, it seemed to
confirm the limits of multicultur-
alism in the nation’s most diverse
state.

TRACE CHANGE
OVER TIME
How did anti-immigrant
sentiment increase between
the 1960s and the 1990s,
and what sorts of actions
were taken by those
opposed to immigration?

Clashes over “Family Values”
If the promise of a multicultural nation was one con-
tested political issue, another was the state of American
families.  New  Right  conservatives  charged  that  the

“abrasive  experiments  of  two  liberal  decades,”  as  a
Reagan  administration  report  put  it,  had  eroded
respect  for  marriage  and  what  they  had  called,  since
the 1970s, “family values.” They pointed to the 40 per-
cent  rate  of  divorce  among  whites  and  the  nearly  60
percent  rate  of  out-of-wedlock  pregnancies  among
African Americans. To conservatives, there was a wide
range of culprits: legislators who enacted liberal divorce
laws, funded child care, and allowed welfare payments
to unmarried mothers, as well as judges who condoned
abortion and banished religious instruction from pub-
lic schools.

Abortion  Abortion  was  central  to  the  battles
between  feminists  and  religious  conservatives  and  a
defining  issue  between  Democrats  and  Republicans.
Feminists  who  described  themselves  as  prochoice
viewed the issue from the perspective of the pregnant
woman; they argued that the right to a legal, safe abor-
tion was crucial to her control over her body and life.
Conversely,  religious  conservatives,  who  pronounced
themselves prolife, viewed abortion from the perspec-
tive  of  the  unborn  fetus  and  claimed  that  its  rights
trumped those of the mother. That is where the debate
had stood since the U.S. Supreme Court’s 1973 decision
in Roe v. Wade.

By  the  1980s,  fundamentalist  Protestants  had
assumed  leadership  of  the  antiabortion  movement,

