CHAPTER 31

  Confronting Global and National Dilemmas, 1989 to the Present  1019

Activists Protesting Outside the Supreme Court in 2002

In 2002 the Supreme Court considered a case in which the National Organization for Women (NOW) had
challenged the legality of abortion clinic protests, such as those undertaken by Operation Rescue. The activ-
ists, and the case itself, demonstrated that the question of abortion remained far from settled, and Americans
on all sides of the issue continued to hold passionate opinions. Photo by Mark Wilson/Getty Images.

which became increasingly confrontational and politi-
cally  powerful.  In  1987,  the  religious  activist  Randall
Terry founded Operation Rescue, which mounted pro-
tests outside abortion clinics and harassed their staffs
and clients. While such vocal protests took shape out-
side clinics, antiabortion activists also won state  laws
that  limited  public  funding  for  abortions,  required
parental notification before minors could obtain abor-
tions, and mandated waiting periods before any woman
could undergo an abortion procedure. Such laws fur-
ther restricted women’s reproductive choices.

EXPLAIN
CONSEQUENCES
How did clashes over
“family values” alter
American politics in the
1990s?

rights  groups  also  sought  legal
rights  for  same-sex  couples —
such  as  the  eligibility  for  work-
place health-care coverage — that
were  akin  to  those  enjoyed  by
married  heterosexuals.  Many  of
the most prominent national gay
rights  organizations,  such  as  the  Human  Rights
Campaign,  focused  on  full  marriage  equality:  a  legal
recognition of same-sex marriage that was on par with
opposite-sex marriages.

Gay  Rights  The  issue  of  homosexuality  stirred
equally deep passions. As more gay men and women
came  out  of  the  closet  in  the  years  after  Stonewall
(Chapter  28),  they  demanded  legal  protections  from
discrimination in housing, education, and employment.
Public opinion about these demands varied by region,
but  by  the  1990s,  many  cities  and  states  had  banned
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Gay

The  Religious  Right  had  long  condemned  homo-
sexuality  as  morally  wrong,  and  public  opinion
remained  sharply  divided.  In  1992,  Colorado  voters
approved an amendment to the state constitution that
prevented  local  governments  from  enacting  ordi-
nances protecting gays and lesbians — a measure that
the Supreme Court subsequently overturned as uncon-
stitutional.  That  same  year,  however,  Oregon  voters
defeated  a  more  radical  initiative  that  would  have

