1020

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

prevented the state from using any funds “to promote,
encourage or facilitate” homosexuality. In 1998, Con-
gress  entered  the  fray  by  enacting  the  Defense  of
Marriage Act, which allowed states to refuse to recog-
nize gay marriages or civil unions formed in other juris-
dictions.  More  recently,  gay  marriage  has  been  legal-
ized  in  eleven  states:  California,  Connecticut,  Iowa,
Maine,  Maryland,  Massachusetts,  New  Hamp shire,
New York, Vermont, Washington, and Rhode Island.

Culture  Wars  and  the  Supreme  Court  Divisive
rights issues increasingly came before the U.S. Supreme
Court. Abortion led the way, with abortion rights activ-
ists  challenging  the  constitutionality  of  the  new  state
laws  limiting  access  to  the  procedure.  In  Webster  v.
Reproductive  Health  Services  (1989),  the  Supreme
Court  upheld  the  authority  of  state  governments  to
limit the use of public funds and facilities for abortions.
Then, in the important case of Planned Parenthood of
Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey (1992), the Court
upheld  a  law  requiring  a  twenty-four-hour  waiting
period prior to an abortion. Surveying these and other
decisions, a reporter suggested that 1989 was “the year
the Court turned right,” with a conservative majority
ready and willing to limit or invalidate liberal legisla-
tion and legal precedents.

This observation was only partly correct. The Court
was  not  yet  firmly  conservative.  Although  the  Casey
decision  upheld  certain  restrictions  on  abortions,  it
affirmed the “essential holding” in Roe v. Wade (1973)
that women had a constitutional right to control their
reproduction.  Justice  David  Souter,  appointed  to  the
Court by President George H. W. Bush in 1990, voted
with  Reagan  appointees  Sandra  Day  O’Connor  and
Anthony  Kennedy  to  uphold  Roe.  Souter,
like
O’Connor, emerged as an ideologically moderate jus-
tice on a range of issues. Moreover, in a landmark deci-
sion,  Lawrence  v.  Texas  (2003),  the  Supreme  Court
limited the power of states to prohibit private homo-
sexual  activity  between  consenting  adults  and,  more
recently,  in  Windsor  v.  United  States  (2013)  declared
the  Defense  of  Marriage  Act  unconstitutional.  The
Court had crept incrementally, rather than lurched, to
the right while signaling its continued desire to remain
within  the  broad  mainstream  of  American  public
opinion.

The Clinton Presidency, 1993–2001
The culture wars contributed to a new, divisive parti-
sanship  in  national  politics.  Rarely  in  the  twentieth
century had the two major parties so adamantly refused

to  work  together.  Also  rare  was  the  vitriolic  rhetoric
that politicians used to describe their opponents. The
fractious partisanship was filtered through — or, many
would  argue,  created  by — the  new  twenty-four-hour
cable  news  television  networks,  such  as  Fox  News
and  CNN.  Commentators  on  these  channels,  finding
that  nothing  drew  viewers  like  aggressive  partisan-
ship,  increasingly  abandoned  their  roles  as  convey-
ors  of  information  and  became  entertainers  and
provocateurs.

That divisiveness was a hallmark of the presidency
of William Jefferson Clinton. In 1992, Clinton, the gov-
ernor  of  Arkansas,  styled  himself  a  New  Democrat
who would bring Reagan Democrats and middle-class
voters back to the party. Only forty-six, he was an ener-
getic,  ambitious  policy  wonk — extraordinarily  well
informed about the details of public policy. To win the
Democratic nomination in 1992, Clinton had to sur-
vive  charges  that  he  embodied  the  permissive  social
values conservatives associated with the 1960s: namely,
that he dodged the draft to avoid service in Vietnam,
smoked marijuana, and cheated repeatedly on his wife.
The charges were damaging, but Clinton adroitly talked
his way into the presidential nomination: he had cha-
risma and a way with words. For his running mate, he
chose Albert A. Gore, a senator from Tennessee. Gore
was about the same age as Clinton, making them the
first baby-boom national ticket as well as the nation’s
first all-southern major-party ticket.

President  George  H.  W.  Bush  won  renomination
over his lone opponent, the conservative columnist Pat
Buchanan.  The  Democrats  mounted  an  aggressive
campaign that focused on Clinton’s domestic agenda:
he  promised  a  tax  cut  for  the  middle  class,  universal
health  insurance,  and  a  reduction  of  the  huge
Republican budget deficit. It was an audacious combi-
nation of traditional social-welfare liberalism and fiscal
conservatism. For his part, Bush could not overcome
voters’ discontent with the weak economy and conser-
vatives’ disgust at his tax hikes. He received only 38.0
percent of the popular vote as millions of Republicans
cast  their  ballots  for  independent  businessman  Ross
Perot,  who  won  more  votes  (19.0  percent)  than  any
independent  candidate  since  Theodore  Roosevelt  in
1912. With 43.7 percent of the vote, Clinton won the
election (Map 31.3). Still, there were reasons for him to
worry. Among all post–World War II presidents, only
Richard Nixon (in 1969) entered the White House with
a comparably small share of the national vote.

New Democrats and Public Policy  Clinton tried to
steer a middle course through the nation’s increasingly

