CHAPTER 31

  Confronting Global and National Dilemmas, 1989 to the Present  1021

3

3

8

5

4

5

8

11

7

4

54

3

4

43

12

4
8
15
3
10

3

3

5

10

7

6

11

8

32

6

9

11

18

33

22 12

21

5

8

11

7

9

13

23

13

14

8

25

4

3

Washington, D.C.

Candidate
William J. Clinton
(Democrat)

George H. W. Bush
(Republican)

H. Ross Perot
(Independent)

Electoral
Vote

Popular
Vote

Percent of
Popular Vote

370

44,908,232

43.7

168

39,102,282

38.0

0

19,725,433

19.0

MAP 31.3
The Presidential Election of 1992

The ﬁrst national election after the end of the Cold
War focused on the economy, which had fallen into a
recession in 1991. The ﬁrst-ever all-southern Democratic
ticket of Bill Clinton (Arkansas) and Al Gore (Tennessee)
won support across the country but won the election
with only 43.7 percent of the popular vote. The Repub-
lican candidate, President George H. W. Bush, ran
strongly in his home state of Texas and the South,
an emerging Republican stronghold. Independent
candidate H. Ross Perot, a wealthy technology entre-
preneur, polled an impressive 19.0 percent of the
popular vote by capitalizing on voter dissatisfaction
with the huge federal deﬁcits of the Reagan-Bush
administrations.

divisive  partisanship.  On  his  left  was  the  Democratic
Party’s  weakened  but  still  vocal  liberal  wing.  On  his
right were party moderates influenced by Reagan-era
notions of reducing government regulation and the wel-
fare state. Clinton’s “third way,” as he dubbed it, called for
the new president to tailor his proposals to satisfy these
two quite different — and often antagonistic — political
constituencies. Clinton had notable successes as well as
spectacular failures pursuing this course.

The  spectacular  failure  came  first.  Clinton’s  most
ambitious social-welfare goal was to provide a system
of  health  care  that  would  cover  all  Americans  and
reduce  the  burden  of  health-care  costs  on  the  larger
economy.  Although  the  United  States  spent  a  higher
percentage  of  its  gross  national  product  (GNP)  on
medical  care  than  any  other  nation,  it  was  the  only

major industrialized country that
did  not  provide  government-
guaranteed health insurance to all
citizens.  It  was  an  objective  that
had  eluded  every  Democratic
president since Harry Truman.

UNDERSTAND
POINTS OF VIEW
What made President
Clinton a “New Demo-
crat,” and how much
did his proposals differ
from traditional liberal
objectives?

Recognizing  the  potency  of
Reagan’s  attack  on  “big  govern-
ment,”  Clinton’s  health-care  task
force — led  by  First  Lady  Hillary  Rodham  Clinton —
proposed a system of “managed competition.” Private
insurance companies and market forces were to rein in
health-care expenditures. The cost of this system would
fall heavily on employers, and many smaller businesses
campaigned strongly against it. So did the health insur-
ance industry and the American Medical Association,
powerful lobbies with considerable influence in Wash-
ington. By mid-1994, Demo cratic leaders in Congress
declared  that  the  Clintons’  universal  health-care  pro-
posal was dead. Forty million Americans, or 15 percent
of the population, remained without health insurance
coverage.

More  successful  was  Clinton’s  plan  to  reduce  the
budget  deficits  of  the  Reagan-Bush  presidencies.  In
1993, Clinton secured a five-year budget package that
would reduce the federal deficit by $500 billion. Repub-
licans  unanimously  opposed  the  proposal  because  it
raised taxes on corporations and wealthy individuals,
and  liberal  Democrats  complained  because  it  limited
social  spending.  But  shared  sacrifice  led  to  shared
rewards. By 1998, Clinton’s fiscal policies had balanced
the federal budget and begun to pay down the federal
debt — at  a  rate  of  $156  billion  a  year  between  1999
and 2001. As fiscal sanity returned to Washington, the
economy  boomed,  thanks  in  part  to  the  low  interest
rates stemming from deficit reduction.

The Republican Resurgence  The midterm election
of 1994 confirmed that the Clinton presidency had not
produced an electoral realignment: conservatives still
had a working majority. In a well-organized campaign,
in  which  grassroots  appeals  to  the  New  Right  domi-
nated, Republicans gained fifty-two seats in the House
of Representatives, giving them a majority for the first
time since 1954. They also retook control of the Senate
and captured eleven governorships. Leading the Repub-
lican  charge  was  Representative  Newt  Gingrich  of
Georgia,  who  revived  calls  for  significant  tax  cuts,
reductions  in  welfare  programs,  anticrime  initiatives,
and  cutbacks  in  federal  regulations.  These  initiatives,
which  Gingrich  promoted  under  the  banner  of  a
“Contract with America,” had been central components

