1022

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

An Influential First Lady and
Senator

Hillary Clinton was the most inﬂu-
ential First Lady since Eleanor
Roosevelt. But she had ambitions
beyond being a political spouse. In
2000, and again in 2006, she won
election to the U.S. Senate from
New York. In 2008, she nearly cap-
tured the Democratic nomination
for president, and in 2009 she was
appointed secretary of state by
the man who defeated her in the
Democratic primaries (and who
went on to win the presidency),
Barack Obama. Here she is shown
with a group of her supporters in
one of her Senate campaigns.
Photo by David Handschuh/NY Daily
News Archive via Getty Images.

of  the  conservative-backed  Reagan  Revolution of  the
1980s, but Gingrich believed that under the presidency
of George H. W. Bush Republicans had not emphasized
them enough.

In  response  to  the  massive  Democratic  losses  in
1994, Clinton moved to the right. Claiming in 1996 that
“the era of big government is over,” he avoided expan-
sive social-welfare proposals for the remainder of his
presidency and sought Republican support for a cen-
trist New Democrat program. The signal piece of that
program was reforming the welfare system, a measure
that saved relatively little money but carried a big ideo-
logical message. Many taxpaying Americans believed —
with  some  supporting  evidence — that  the  Aid  to
Families  with  Dependent  Children  (AFDC) program
encouraged  female  recipients  to  remain  on  welfare
rather than seek employment. In August 1996, the fed-
eral  government  abolished  AFDC,  achieving  a  long-
standing goal of conservatives when Clinton signed the
Personal Responsibility and Work Oppor tunity Recon-
ciliation Act. Liberals were furious with the president.

Clinton’s Impeachment  Following a relatively easy
victory  in  the  1996  election,  Clinton’s  second  term
unraveled when a sex scandal led to his impeachment.
Clinton denied having had a sexual affair with Monica
Lewinsky, a former White House intern. Independent
prosecutor Kenneth Starr, a  conservative Republican,
concluded  that  Clinton  had  committed  perjury  and
obstructed justice and that these actions were grounds

for impeachment. Viewed historically, Americans have
usually defined “high crimes and misdemeanors” — the
constitutional standard for impeachment — as involv-
ing a serious abuse of public trust that endangered the
republic. In 1998, conservative Republicans favored a
much  lower  standard  because  they  did  not  accept
Clinton’s legitimacy as president. They vowed to oust
him from office for lying about an extramarital affair.

On  December  19,  the  House  of  Representatives
narrowly approved two articles of impeachment. Only
a minority of Americans supported the House’s action;
according  to  a  CBS  News  poll,  38  percent  favored
impeachment  while  58  percent  opposed  it.  Lacking
public support, in early 1999 Republicans in the Senate
fell well short of the two-thirds majority they needed to
remove  the  president.  But  like  Andrew  Johnson,  the
only other president to be tried by the Senate, Clinton
and  the  Democratic  Party  paid  a  high  price  for  his
acquittal.  Preoccupied  with  defending  himself,  the
president was unable to fashion a Democratic alterna-
tive to the Republicans’ domestic agenda. The American
public also paid a high price, because the Republicans’
vendetta  against  Clinton  drew  attention  away  from
pressing national problems.

Post–Cold War Foreign Policy
Politically  weakened  domestically  after  1994,  Clinton
believed he could nonetheless make a difference on the
international stage. There, post–Cold War developments

