CHAPTER 31

  Confronting Global and National Dilemmas, 1989 to the Present  1023

Bill Clinton

President William (Bill) Clinton returned
the Democratic Party to the White House
after twelve years under Ronald Reagan
and George H. W. Bush. Clinton was best
known politically for what he called the
third way, a phrase that described his
efforts to craft policies that appealed to
both liberals and moderates in his party.
Here he signs the Welfare Reform Act
of 1996 (ofﬁcially the Personal
Responsibility and Work Oppor tunity
Reconciliation Act), which brought an end
to the federal AFDC program that
Democrats had created in 1935. AP
Images.

gave  him  historic  opportunities.  The  1990s  was  a
decade of stunning change in Europe and Central Asia.
A great arc of newly independent states emerged as the
Soviet empire collapsed. The majority of the 142 mil-
lion people living in the former Soviet states were poor,
but the region had a sizable middle class and was rich
in natural resources, especially oil and natural gas.

Among the challenges for the United States was the
question of whether to support the admission of some
of  the  new  states  into  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty
Organization  (NATO)  (Chapter  25).  Many  observers
believed,  with  some  justification,  that  extending  the
NATO alliance into Eastern Europe, right up to Russia’s
western border, would damage U.S-Russian relations.
However, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Hungary were
also  eager  to  become  NATO  members — an  outcome
that would draw into the Western alliance three nations
that Stalin had decisively placed in the Soviet sphere of
influence at the close of World War II. Clinton encour-
aged  NATO  admission  for  those  three  countries  but
stopped short of advocating a broader expansion of the
alliance  during  his  terms  in  office.  Nonetheless,  by
2010,  twelve  new  nations — most  of  them  in  Eastern
Europe — had  been  admitted  to  the  NATO  alliance.
Nothing  symbolized  the  end  of  the  Cold  War  more
than  the  fact  that  ten  of  those  nations  were  former
members of the War saw Pact.

The Breakup of Yugoslavia  Two of the new NATO
states, Slovenia and Croatia, emerged from an intrac-

PLACE EVENTS
IN CONTEXT
In what speciﬁc ways were
foreign policy develop-
ments during the Clinton
presidency evidence of the
end of the Cold War?

table  set  of  conflicts  that  led  to
the dissolution of the communist
nation of Yugoslavia. In 1992, the
heavily  Muslim  province  of
Bosnia-Herzegovina  declared  its
independence,  but  its  substan-
tial Serbian population refused to
live in a Muslim-run multiethnic
state. Slobodan Milosevic, an uncompromising Serbian
nationalist,  launched  a  ruthless  campaign  of  “ethnic
cleansing” to create a Serbian state. In November 1995,
Clinton  organized  a  NATO-led  bombing  campaign
and  peacekeeping  effort,  backed  by  20,000  American
troops,  that  ended  the  Serbs’  vicious  expansionist
drive. Four years later, a new crisis emerged in Kosovo,
another  province  of  the  Serbian-dominated  Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. Again led by the United States,
NATO intervened with air strikes and military forces
to  preserve  Kosovo’s  autonomy.  By  2008,  seven  inde-
pendent  nations  had  emerged  from  the  wreckage  of
Yugoslavia.

America and the Middle East  No post–Cold War
development  proved  more  challenging  than  the
emergence of radical Islamic movements in the Middle
East. Muslim nations there had a long list of grievances
against  the  West.  Colonialism — both  British  and
French — in the early decades of the twentieth century
had  been  ruthless.  A  U.S.-sponsored  overthrow  of
Iran’s  government  in  1953 — and  twenty-five  years  of

