1024

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

American  support  for  the  Iranian  shah — was  also  a
sore  point.  America’s  support  for  Israel  in  the  1967
Six-Day  War  and  the  1973  Yom  Kippur  War  and  its
near-unconditional backing of Israel in the 1980s were
particularly galling to Muslims. The  region’s religious
and secular moderates complained about these injus-
tices, but many of them had political and economic ties
to the West, which constrained their criticism.

This  situation  left  an  opening  for  radical  Islamic
fundamentalists to build a movement based on fanat-
ical  opposition  to  Western  imperialism  and  con-
sumer culture. These groups interpreted the American
presence in Saudi Arabia as signaling new U.S. colo-
nial  ambitions  in  the  region.  Clinton  had  inherited
from  President  George  H.  W.  Bush  a  defeated  Iraq
and  a  sizable  military  force — about  4,000  Air  Force
personnel — in Saudi Arabia. American fighter jets left
Saudi  Arabian  air  bases  to  fly  regular  missions  over
Iraq, enforcing a no-fly zone, where Iraqi planes were

forbidden,  and  bombing  select  targets.  Clinton  also
enforced a UN-sanctioned embargo on all trade with
Iraq, a policy designed to constrain Saddam Hussein’s
military  that  ultimately  denied  crucial  goods  to  the
civilian  population.  Angered  by  the  continued  U.S.
presence  in  Saudi  Arabia,  Muslim  fundamentalists
soon  began  targeting  Americans.  In  1993,  radical
Mus lim immigrants set off a bomb in a parking garage
beneath  the  World  Trade  Center  in  New  York  City,
killing six people and injuring more than a thousand.
Terrorists used truck bombs to blow up U.S. embassies
in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998, and they bombed the
USS Cole in the Yemeni port of Aden in 2000.

The  Clinton  administration  knew  these  attacks
were the work of Al Qaeda, a network of radical Islamic
terrorists organized by the wealthy Saudi exile Osama
bin Laden. In February 1998, bin Laden had issued a
call for holy war — a “Jihad against Jews and Crusaders,”
in which it was said to be the duty of every Muslim to

Terrorists Bomb USS Cole

On October 12, 2000, a radical Muslim group with ties to Al Qaeda detonated a powerful bomb alongside
the USS Cole, which was refueling in the port of Aden in Yemen. The explosion tore a large hole in the ship’s
hull, killing seventeen American sailors and injuring thirty-seven others. After repairs costing $250 million,
the USS Cole returned to active duty in April 2002. AFP/Getty Images.

