CHAPTER 31

  Confronting Global and National Dilemmas, 1989 to the Present  1025

kill  Americans  and  their  allies.  After  the  embassy
attacks, Clinton ordered air strikes on Al Qaeda bases
in  Afghanistan,  where  an  estimated  15,000  radical
operatives  had  been  trained  since  1990.  The  strikes
failed  to  disrupt  this  growing  terrorist  network,  and
when  Clinton  left  office,  the  Central  Intelligence
Agency (CIA), the State Department, and the Pentagon
were  well  aware  of  the  potential  threat  posed  by  bin
Laden’s  followers.  That  was  where  things  stood  on
September 10, 2001.

Into a New Century
In  the  second  decade  of  the  new  century,  Americans
can reflect on two significant developments that have
profoundly shaped their own day: the terrorist attack
on the United States on September 11, 2001, and the
election  of  the  nation’s  first  African  American  presi-
dent, Barack Obama, on November 4, 2008. Too little
time has passed for us to assess  whether either event
will  be  remembered  as  helping  to  define  the  twenty-
first century. But both have indelibly marked our pres-
ent. And both had distinct antecedents and still have
profound implications.

The Ascendance of George W. Bush
The 2000 presidential election briefly offered the prom-
ise of a break with the intense partisanship of the final
Clinton  years.  The  Republican  nominee,  George  W.
Bush,  the  son  of  President  George  H.  W.  Bush,  pre-

sented  himself  as  an  outsider,  deploring  Washington
partisanship  and  casting  himself  as  a  “uniter,  not  a
divider.” His opponent, Al Gore — Clinton’s vice presi-
dent — was  a  liberal  policy  specialist.  The  election  of
2000 would join those of 1876 and 1960 as the closest
and most contested in American history. Gore won the
popular vote, amassing 50.9 million votes to Bush’s 50.4
million,  but  fell  short  in  the  electoral  college,  267  to
271. Consumer- and labor-rights activist Ralph Nader
ran as the Green Party candidate and drew away pre-
cious votes in key states that certainly would have car-
ried Gore to victory.

Late on election night, the vote tally in Florida gave
Bush the narrowest of victories. As was their legal pre-
rogative,  the  Democrats  demanded  hand  recounts  in
several counties. A month of tumult followed, until the
U.S. Supreme Court, voting strictly along conservative/
liberal lines, ordered the recount stopped and let Bush’s
victory stand. Recounting ballots without a consistent
standard  to  determine  “voter  intent,”  the  Court  rea-
soned, violated the rights of Floridian voters under the
Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection clause. As if
acknowledging the frailty of this argument, the Court
declared  that  Bush  v.  Gore  was  not  to  be  regarded  as
precedent.  But  in  a  dissenting  opinion,  Justice  John
Paul  Stevens  warned  that  the  transparently  partisan
decision  undermined  “the  Nation’s  confidence  in  the
judge as an impartial guardian of the rule of law.”

Although Bush had positioned himself as a moder-
ate, countertendencies drove his administration from
the start. His vice president, the uncompromising con-
servative Richard (Dick) Cheney, became, with Bush’s

The Contested Vote in Florida, 2000

When the vote recount got under way in Palm
Beach, Florida, in 2000, both sides brought out sup-
porters to demonstrate outside the Supervisor of
Elections Ofﬁce, in hopes of inﬂuencing the ofﬁcials
doing the counting. In this photograph, supporters
of George W. Bush clash with supporters of Al Gore
after a rally on November 13, 2000, that had been
addressed by Jesse Jackson, the dominant African
American ﬁgure in the Democratic Party. © Reuters/
Corbis.

