CHAPTER 31

  Confronting Global and National Dilemmas, 1989 to the Present  1027

FIGURE 31.6
Gross Federal Debt as a Percent-
age of Gross Domestic Product

Economists argue that the best
measure of a nation’s debt is its size
relative to the overall economy —
that is, its percentage of gross
domestic product (GDP). The size
of the total U.S. debt declined
from its World War II high until
the 1980s, when it increased
dramatically under President
Reagan. Since then, the debt
has consistently increased as a
percentage of GDP, aside from
a small decline under President
Clinton’s deﬁcit-reduction plans
in the mid-1990s. Source: dshort.com.

150%

140%

130%

120%

110%

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

T. Roosevelt
Taft

Wilson

Harding
Coolidge
Hoover

F. D. Roosevelt
Truman

Eisenhower

Kennedy
Johnson

Nixon
Ford

Carter

Reagan
G. H. W. Bush

Clinton

G. W. Bush

Obama

Democrat is president

Republican is president

Democrats control Congress

Republicans control Congress

Split Congress

Debt/GDP

Debt/GDP estimates

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Operating out of Afghanistan, where they had been
harbored  by  the  fundamentalist  Taliban  regime,  the
elusive  Al  Qaeda  briefly  offered  a  clear  target.  In
October 2001, while Afghani allies carried the ground
war,  American  planes  attacked  the  enemy.  By  early
2002, this lethal combination had ousted the Taliban,
destroyed Al Qaeda’s training camps, and killed or cap-
tured many of its operatives. However, the big prize, Al
Qaeda  leader  Osama  bin  Laden,  had  retreated  to  a

mountain  redoubt.  Inexplicably,  U.S.  forces  failed  to
press the attack, and bin Laden escaped over the border
into Pakistan.

The  Invasion  of  Iraq  On  the  domestic  side,  Bush
declared the terrorist threat too big to be contained by
ordinary law-enforcement means. He wanted the gov-
ernment’s powers of domestic surveillance placed on a
wartime footing. With little debate, in 2001 Congress

September 11, 2001

Photographers at the scene after a plane crashed into the north tower of New York City’s World Trade Center
on September 11 found themselves recording a deﬁning moment in the nation’s history. When a second air-
liner approached and then slammed into the building’s south tower at 9:03 A.M., the nation knew this was
no accident. The United States was under attack. Of the 2,843 people killed on that day, 2,617 died at the
World Trade Center. Robert Clark/Institute Artist Management.

