1028

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

passed the USA PATRIOT Act, granting the administra-
tion sweeping authority to monitor citizens and appre-
hend suspected terrorists. On the international front,
Bush used the war on terror as the premise for a new
policy of preventive war. Under international law, only
an  imminent  threat  justified  a  nation’s  right  to  strike
first.  Now,  under  the  so-called  Bush  doctrine,  the
United States lowered the bar. It reserved for itself the
right  to  act  in  “anticipatory  self-defense.”  In  2002,
President  Bush  singled  out  Iran,  North  Korea,  and
Iraq — “an axis of evil” — as the targeted states.

Of the three, Iraq was the preferred mark. Officials
in the Pentagon regarded Iraq as unfinished business,
left over from the Gulf War of 1991. More grandly, they
saw  in  Iraq  an  opportunity  to  unveil  America’s  sup-
posed  mission  to  democratize  the  world.  Iraqis,  they
believed,  would  abandon  the  tyrant  Saddam  Hussein
and  embrace  democracy  if  given  the  chance.  The
democratizing  effect  would  spread  across  the  Middle
East,  toppling  or  reforming  other  unpopular  Arab
regimes and stabilizing the region. That, in turn, would
secure  the  Middle  East’s  oil  supply,  whose  fragility
Saddam’s  1990  invasion  of  Kuwait  had  made  all  too
clear. It was the oil, in the end, that was of vital interest
to the United States (Map 31.4).

None  of  these  considerations,  either  singly  or
together, met Bush’s declared threshold for preventive
war. So the president reluctantly acceded to the demand
by America’s anxious European allies that the United
States go to the UN Security Council, which demanded
that Saddam Hussein allow the return of the UN weap-
ons inspectors expelled in 1998. Saddam surprisingly
agreed. Nevertheless, anxious to invade Iraq for its own
reasons,  the  Bush  administration  geared  up  for  war.
Insisting  that  Iraq  constituted  a  “grave  and  gathering
danger”  and  ignoring  its  failure  to  secure  a  second,
legitimizing  UN  resolution,  Bush  invaded  in  March
2003. America’s one major ally in the rush to war was
Great  Britain.  Relations  with  France  and  Germany
became poisonous. Even neighboring Mexico and Can-
ada condemned the invasion, and Turkey, a key mili-
tary ally, refused transit permission, ruining the army’s
plan  for  a  northern  thrust  into  Iraq.  As  for  the  Arab
world, it exploded in anti-American demonstrations.

Within  three  weeks,  American  troops  had  taken
the Iraqi capital. The regime collapsed, and its leaders
went into hiding (Saddam Hussein was captured nine
months  later).  But  despite  meticulous  military  plan-
ning,  the  Pentagon  had  made  no  provision  for  post-
conflict  operations.  Thousands  of  poor  Iraqis  looted

1982–1991: U.S. hostages taken by Islamic militants
1983: 24 killed in bombing of U.S. embassy; 241 U.S.
military personnel killed in bombing of U.S. Marine
barracks

Me d i t e r ra n e a n  S ea

(cid:55)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)

Gulf of
Sidra

(cid:37)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:93)(cid:76)

LEBANON
ISRAEL

(cid:45)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)

TURKEY

SYRIA

IRAQ

(cid:37)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:87)

(cid:37)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:71)

(cid:38)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)
EGYPT

1986: U.S. air strikes
against leader
Muammar al-Qaddafi
2004: Qaddafi ends
weapons programs

LIBYA

1994: U.S. brokers Israeli-
Palestinian peace treaty
2004: U.S.-backed “road map”
for peace stalls amid
continuing violence

JORDAN

2003–2004: United States
invades Iraq and removes
Saddam Hussein from power;
continued violence against
U.S. occupation, as well as
sectarian violence between
Shiite and Sunni Muslims
2010: Official end of U.S.
combat mission, 50,000 U.S.
troops remain in Iraq

NIGER

SUDAN

CHAD

Major oil fields

W

N

S

E

Red Sea

ERITREA
2000: 17 U.S. sailors killed
in terrorist attack on the
USS Cole  in the port of
Aden

YEMEN
(cid:36)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)

DJIBOUTI

ETHIOPIA

SOMALIA

Caspian
Sea

(cid:55)(cid:72)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)

1979–1981:
U.S. embassy personnel
held hostage

1991: U.S. forces expel Iraqi
army from Kuwait (Gulf War)

IRAN

KUWAIT

BAHRAIN

1988: U.S. Navy shoots
down Iranian airliner

AFGHANISTAN

(cid:43)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)

(cid:46)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:79)

(cid:46)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)

PAKISTAN

(cid:39)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)

Persian
Gulf

(cid:53)(cid:76)(cid:92)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:75)

QATAR U.A.E.

Strait of
Hormuz

SAUDI
ARABIA

OMAN

Arabian
Sea

INDIA

2001–2002: U.S.-led war against
the Taliban and Al Qaeda in
response to September 11, 2001,
attacks
2004: Continued search for
Osama bin Laden
2006–2010: Taliban resurgence in
Afghanistan and western Pakistan;
escalation of U.S. fighting, nearly
100,000 U.S. soldiers and personnel
in Afghanistan

0

0

250

500 miles

250

500 kilometers

MAP 31.4
U.S. Involvement in the Middle East, 1979–2010

The United States has long played an active role in the Middle East, driven by the strategic
importance of that region and, most important, by America’s need to ensure a reliable supply of
oil from the Persian Gulf states. This map shows the highlights of that troubled involvement, from
the Tehran embassy hostage taking in 1979 to the invasion and current occupation of both Iraq and
Afghanistan.

