CHAPTER 31

  Confronting Global and National Dilemmas, 1989 to the Present  1029

everything  they  could  get  their  hands  on,  shattering
the  infrastructure  of  Iraq’s  cities  and  leaving  them
without reliable supplies of electricity and water. In the
midst of this turmoil, an insurgency began, sparked by
Sunni  Muslims  who  had  dominated  Iraq  under
Saddam’s Baathist regime.

Iraq’s Shiite majority, long oppressed by Saddam, at
first welcomed the Americans, but extremist Shiite ele-
ments soon turned hostile, and U.S. forces found them-
selves  under  fire  from  both  sides.  With  the  borders
unguarded,  Al  Qaeda  supporters  flocked  in  from  all
over the Middle East, eager to do battle with the infidel
Americans, bringing along a specialty of the jihad: the
suicide bomber.

Blinded  by  their  own  nationalism,  dominant
nations tend to underestimate the strength of national-
ism in other people. Lyndon Johnson discovered this in
Vietnam. Soviet premier Leonid Brezhnev discovered
it in Afghanistan. And George W. Bush rediscovered it
in Iraq. Although it was hard for Americans to believe,
Iraqis of all stripes viewed the U.S. forces as invaders.
Moreover, in a war against insurgents, no occupation
force comes out with clean hands. In 2004 in Iraq, that
painful  truth  burst  forth  graphically  in  photographs
showing  American  guards  at  Baghdad’s  Abu  Ghraib
prison abusing and torturing suspected insurgents. The
ghastly images shocked the world. For Muslims, they
offered final proof of American treachery. At that low
point, in 2004, the United States had spent upward of
$100 billion. More than 1,000 American soldiers had
died,  and  10,000  others  had  been  wounded,  many
maimed for life. But if the United States pulled out, Iraq
would descend into chaos. So, as Bush took to saying,
the United States had to “stay the course.”

The 2004 Election  As the 2004 presidential election
approached,  Rove,  Bush’s  top  advisor,  theorized  that
stirring  the  culture  wars  and  emphasizing  patriotism
and Bush’s war on terror would mobilize conservatives
to  vote  for  Bush.  Rove  encouraged  activists  to  place
antigay  initiatives  on  the  ballot  in  key  states  to  draw
conservative  voters  to  the  polls;  in  all,  eleven  states
would  pass  ballot  initiatives  that  wrote  bans  on  gay
marriage equality into state constitutions that year. The
Democratic  nominee,  Senator  John  Kerry  of  Massa-
chusetts, was a Vietnam hero, twice wounded and dec-
orated for bravery — in contrast to the president, who
had spent the Vietnam years comfortably in the Texas
Air  National  Guard.  But  when  Kerry  returned  from
service  in  Vietnam,  he  had  joined  the  antiwar  group
Vietnam  Veterans  Against  the  War  and  in  1971  had
delivered a blistering critique of the war to the Senate
Armed Services Committee. In the logic of the culture
wars,  this  made  him  vulnerable  to  charges  of  being
weak and unpatriotic.

The  Democratic convention in  August  was  a  tab-
leau of patriotism, filled with waving flags, retired gen-
erals, and Kerry’s Vietnam buddies. However, a sudden
onslaught of slickly produced television ads by a group
calling  itself  Swift  Boat  Veterans  for  Truth,  falsely
charging that Kerry had lied to win his medals, fatally
undercut his advantage. Nor did it help that Kerry, as
a  three-term  senator,  had  a  lengthy  record  that  was
easily  mined  for  hard-to-explain  votes.  Republicans
tagged  him  a  “flip-flopper,”  and  the  accusation,  end-
lessly  repeated,  stuck.  Nearly  60  percent  of  eligible
voters — the  highest  percentage  since  1968 — went  to
the polls. Bush beat Kerry, with 286 electoral votes to
Kerry’s 252. In exit polls, Bush did well among voters

Abu Ghraib

This image of one of the milder forms of torture
experienced by inmates at the Abu Ghraib prison
was obtained by the Associated Press in 2003. It
shows a detainee bent over with his hands through
the bars of a cell while being watched by a comfort-
ably seated soldier. This photograph and others
showing far worse treatment administered by
sometimes jeering military personnel outraged
many in the United States and abroad, particu-
larly in the Muslim world. B.K. Bangash/AP Images.

