1030

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

for  whom  moral  “values”  and  national  security  were
top concerns. Voters told interviewers that Bush made
them feel “safer.” Bush was no longer a minority presi-
dent. He had won a clear, if narrow, popular majority.

Violence Abroad and Economic
Collapse at Home
George Bush’s second term was defined by crisis man-
agement. In 2005, Hurricane Katrina — one of the dead-
liest  hurricanes  in  the  nation’s  history — devastated
New  Orleans.  Chaos  ensued  as  floodwaters  breached
earthen  barricades  surrounding  the  city.  Many  resi-
dents remained without food, drinking water, or shel-
ter for days following the storm, and deaths mounted —
the  final  death  toll  stood  at  more  than  2,000.  Initial
emergency responses to the catastrophe by federal and
local authorities were uncoordinated and inadequate.
Because the hardest-hit parts of the city were poor and
African  American,  Katrina  had  revealed  the  poverty
and vulnerability at the heart of American cities.

The  run  of  crises  did  not  abate  after  Katrina.
Increasing  violence  and  a  rising  insurgency  in  Iraq
made the war there even more unpopular in the United
States. In 2007, changes in U.S. military strategy helped
quell some of the worst violence, but the war dragged
into  its  fifth  and  sixth  years  under  Bush’s  watch.  A
war-weary  public  grew  impatient.  Then,  in  2008,  the
American economy began to stumble. By the fall, the
Dow  Jones  Industrial  Average  had  lost  half  its  total
value,  and  major  banks,  insurance  companies,  and
financial institutions were on the verge of collapse. The
entire  automobile  industry  was  near  bankruptcy.
Millions of Americans lost their jobs, and the unem-
ployment  rate  surged  to  10  percent.  Housing  prices
dropped by as much as 40 percent in some parts of the
country, and millions of Americans defaulted on their
mortgages.  The  United  States  had  entered  the  worst
economic recession since the 1930s, what soon became
known as the Great Recession — technically, the reces-
sion had begun in 2007, but its major effects were not
felt until the fall of 2008.

The  2008  presidential  election  took  shape  in  that
perilous context. In a historically remarkable primary
season,  the  Democratic  nomination  was  contested
between the first woman and the first African American
to be viable presidential contenders, Hillary Rodham
Clinton and Barack Hussein Obama. In a close-fought
contest, Obama had emerged by early summer as the
nominee.

months before the election, Secretary of the Treasury
Henry Paulson urged Congress to pass the Emergency
Economic Stabilization Act, commonly referred to as
the  bailout  of  the  financial  sector.  Passed  in  early
October,  the  act  dedicated  $700  billion  to  rescuing
many  of  the  nation’s  largest  banks  and  brokerage
houses. Between Congress’s actions and the indepen-
dent  efforts  of  the  Treasury  Department  and  the
Federal Reserve, the U.S. government invested close to
$1 trillion in saving the nation’s financial system.

The Obama Presidency
During  his  campaign  for  the  presidency  against
Republican  senator  John  McCain,  Barack  Obama,  a
Democratic  senator  from  Illinois,  established  himself
as a unique figure in American politics. The son of an
African immigrant-student and a young white woman
from Kansas, Obama was raised in Hawaii and Indo-
nesia,  and  he  easily  connected  with  an  increasingly
multiracial  and  multicultural  America.  A  generation
younger than Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, Obama
(born in 1961) seemed at once a product of the 1960s,
especially  civil  rights  gains,  and  outside  its  heated
conflicts.

Obama took the oath of office of the presidency on
January 21, 2009, amid the deepest economic recession
since the Great Depression and with the United States
mired  in  two  wars  in  the  Middle  East.  From  the
podium, the new president recognized the crises and
worried about “a nagging fear that America’s decline is
inevitable.” But Obama also hoped to strike an optimis-
tic  tone.  Americans,  he  said,  must  “begin  again  the
work of remaking America.”

“Remaking  America”  A  nation  that  a  mere  two
generations  ago  would  not  allow  black  Americans  to
dine with white Americans had elected a black man to
the highest office. Obama himself was less taken with
this historic accomplishment — which was also part of
his  deliberate  strategy  to  downplay  race — than  with
developing a plan to deal with the nation’s innumerable
challenges, at home and abroad. With explicit compar-
isons  to  Franklin  Roosevelt,  Obama  used  the  “first
hundred days” of his presidency to lay out an ambitious
agenda: an economic stimulus package of federal spend-
ing to invigorate the economy; plans to draw down the
war  in  Iraq  and  refocus  American  military  efforts  in
Afghanistan; a reform of the nation’s health insurance
system; and new federal laws to regulate Wall Street.

Meanwhile,  the  Bush  administration  confronted
an  economy  in  free  fall.  In  September,  less  than  two

Remarkably,  the  president  accomplished  much  of
that  agenda.  The  Democratic-controlled  Congress

