CHAPTER 31

  Confronting Global and National Dilemmas, 1989 to the Present  1031

Barack Obama

In 2008, Barack Obama became
the ﬁrst African American presi-
dent in U.S. history. And in 2012,
he was reelected to a second
term. Here, President Obama
and First Lady Michelle Obama
walk along Pennsylvania Avenue
during his second inauguration.
Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images.

elected alongside Obama passed the American Recov-
ery and Reinvestment Act, an economic stimulus bill
that  provided  $787  billion  to  state  and  local  govern-
ments for schools, hospitals, and transportation proj-
ects (roads, bridges, and rail) — one of the largest single
packages  of  government  spending  in  American  his-
tory. Congress next passed the Wall Street Reform and
Consumer  Protection  Act,  a  complex  law  that  added
new  regulations  limiting  the  financial  industry  and
new consumer protections. Political debate over both
measures  was  heated.  Critics  on  the  left  argued  that
Obama and Congress had been too cautious, given the
scale of the nation’s  problems, while those on the right
decried  both  laws  as  irresponsible  government  inter-
ference in private investment.

Political debate was fiercest, however, over Obama’s
health insurance reform proposal. Obama encouraged
congressional Democrats to put forth their own pro-
posals, while he worked to find Republican allies who
might be persuaded to support the first major reform of
the nation’s health-care system since the introduction of
Medicare  in  1965.  None  came  forward.  Moreover,  as
debate dragged on, a set of far-right opposition groups,
known  collectively  as  the  Tea  Party,  emerged.  Giving
voice  to  the  extreme  individualism  and  antigovern-
ment  sentiment  traditionally  associated  with  right-
wing  movements  in  the  United  States,  the  Tea  Party
rallied  Americans  against  Obama’s  health-care  bill.
Despite the opposition, the legislation (officially called
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act) passed,

and Obama signed it into law on
March 23, 2010. However, politi-
cal  opposition  and  the  powerful
lobbying  of  the  private  health
insurance  industry  ensured  that
the  new  law  contained  enough
compromises that few could pre-
dict its long-term impact.

IDENTIFY CAUSES
As the nation’s ﬁrst African
American president, what
kinds of unique challenges
did Barack Obama face,
and how did these issues
impact his presidency?

Following  the  legislative  victories  of  his  first  two
years  in  office,  President  Obama  faced  a  divided
Congress.  Democrats  lost  control  of  the  House  of
Representatives in 2010 and failed to regain it in 2012.
With the legislative process stalled, Obama used exec-
utive authority to advance his broader, cautiously lib-
eral,  agenda.  In  2011,  for  instance,  the  president
repealed  the  military’s  “Don’t  Ask,  Don’t  Tell”  policy
and ordered that gay men and lesbians be allowed to
serve  openly  in  the  armed  forces.  And  he  made  two
appointments to the Supreme Court: Sonia Sotomayor
in 2009, the first Latina to serve on the high court, and
Elena Kagan in 2010. Both Sotomayor and Kagan are
committed liberals, though they serve on a Court that
has  shifted  to  the  right  under  Chief  Justice  John
Roberts, a George W. Bush appointee.

War and Instability in the Middle East  Even as he
pursued an ambitious domestic agenda, Obama faced
two wars in the Middle East that he inherited from his
predecessor. Determined to end American occupation
of  Iraq,  the  president  began  in  2010  to  draw  down

