1032

PART 9

  GLOBAL CAPITALISM AND THE END OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY, 1980 TO THE PRESENT

troops stationed there, and the last convoy of U.S. sol-
diers departed in late 2011. The nine-year war in Iraq,
begun  to  find  alleged  weapons  of  mass  destruction,
had followed a long and bloody arc to its end. Disen-
gaging from Afghanistan proved more difficult. Early
in  his  first  term,  the  president  ordered  an  additional
30,000 American troops to parts of the country where
the Taliban had regained control — a “surge” he believed
necessary to avoid further Taliban victories. Securing
long-term  political  stability  in  this  fractious  nation,
however,  has  eluded  Obama.  Leaving  with  the  least
damage  done  was  his  only  viable  option,  and  he
pledged to withdraw all U.S. troops by 2014.

Meanwhile,  a  host  of  events  in  the  Middle  East
deepened the region’s volatility. In late 2010, a series of
multicountry demonstrations and protests, dubbed the
Arab Spring, began to topple some of the region’s auto-
cratic  rulers.  Leaders  in  Egypt,  Tunisia,  Libya,  and
Yemen  were  forced  from  power  by  mass  movements
calling for greater democracy. These movements, which
the  Obama  administration  has  cautiously  supported,
continue to reverberate in more than a dozen nations
in the Middle East. Not long after the Arab Spring was
under way, in May 2011, U.S. Special Forces found and
killed  Osama  bin  Laden  in  Pakistan,  where  he  had
been  hiding  for  many  years.  Obama  received  much
praise  for  the  tactics  that  led  to  the  discovery  of  bin
Laden. More controversial has been the president’s use
of “drone” strikes to assassinate Al Qaeda leaders and
other U.S. enemies in the region.

Climate Change  American wars and other involve-
ment in the Middle East hinged on the region’s central-
ity to global oil production. Oil is important in another
sense,  however:  its  role  in  climate  change.  Scientists
have known for decades that the production of energy
through the burning of carbon-based substances (espe-
cially petroleum and coal) increases the presence of so-
called  greenhouse  gases  in  the  atmosphere,  warming
the  earth.  Increasing  temperatures  will  produce  dra-
matically  new  weather  patterns  and  rising  sea  levels,
developments that threaten agriculture, the global dis-
tributions of plant and animal life, and whole cities and
regions at or near the current sea level. How to halt, or
at  least  mitigate,  climate  change  has  been  one  of  the
most pressing issues of the twenty-first century.

Arriving at a scientific consensus on climate change
has proven easier than developing government policies
to address it. This has been especially true in the United
States,  where  oil  company  lobbyists,  defenders  of
free-market  capitalism,  and  conservatives  who  deny
global warming altogether have been instrumental in

blocking action. For instance, the United States is not a
signatory  to  the  major  international  treaty — the  so-
called Kyoto Protocol — that is designed to reduce car-
bon  emissions.  Legislative  proposals  have  not  fared
better. Cap-and-trade legislation, so named because it
places a cap on individual polluters’ emissions but allows
those companies to trade for more emission allowances
from  low  polluters,  has  stalled  in  Congress.  Another
proposal, a tax on carbon emissions, has likewise gained
little  political  support.  There  is  little  doubt,  however,
that global climate change, and the role of the United
States  in  both  causing  and  mitigating  it,  will  remain
among the most critical questions of the next decades.

Electoral  Shifts
It  remains  to  be  seen  how  the
Obama presidency will affect American politics. From
one vantage point, Obama looks like the beneficiary of
an  electoral  shift  in  a  liberal  direction.  Since  1992,
Democrats have won the popular vote in five of the last
six  presidential  elections,  and  in  2008  Obama  won  a
greater  share  of  the  popular  vote  (nearly  53  percent)
than either Clinton (who won 43 percent in 1992 and
49 percent in 1996) or Gore (48 percent in 2000). In his
bid for reelection in 2012 against Republican nominee
Mitt  Romney,  Obama  won  a  lower  percentage  of  the
popular vote (51 percent) but still won by a comfort-
able margin of nearly 5 million votes. He won the sup-
port of 93 percent of African Americans, 71 percent of
Hispanics, 73 percent of Asian Americans, 55 percent
of women, and 60 percent of Americans under the age
of thirty. His coalition was multiracial, heavily female,
and young.

From  another  vantage  point,  any  electoral  shift
toward liberalism appears contingent and fragile. Even
with Democratic majorities in both houses of Congress
that rivaled Franklin Roosevelt’s in 1937 and Lyndon
Johnson’s in 1965, Obama in 2009–2010 was not able
to generate political momentum for the kind of legisla-
tive advances achieved by those presidential forerun-
ners.  The  history  of  Obama’s  presidency,  and  of  the
early  twenty-first  century  more  broadly,  continues  to
unfold.

SUMMARY
This  chapter  has  stressed  how  globalization — the
worldwide flow of capital, goods, and people — entered
a new phase after the end of the Cold War. The number
of multinational corporations, many of them based in
the United States, increased dramatically, and people,
goods,  and  investment  capital  moved  easily  across

