CHAPTER 31

  CHAPTER REVIEW  1033

political  boundaries.  Financial  markets,  in  particular,
grew increasingly open and interconnected across the
globe.  Technological  innovations  strengthened  the
American  economy  and  transformed  daily  life.  The
computer  revolution  and  the  spread  of  the  Internet
changed the ways in which Americans shopped, worked,
learned, and stayed in touch with family and friends.
Globalization facilitated the immigration of millions of
Asians and Latin Americans into the United States.

In the decades since 1989, American life has been
characterized by the dilemmas presented by the twin
issues  of  globalization  and  divisive  cultural  politics.
Conservatives spoke out strongly, and with increasing
effectiveness,  against  multiculturalism  and  what  they
viewed  as  serious  threats  to  “family  values.”  Debates

over  access  to  abortion,  affirmative  action,  and  the
legal  rights  of  homosexuals  intensified.  The  terrorist
attacks of September 11, 2001, diverted attention from
this increasingly bitter partisanship, but that partisan-
ship  was  revived  after  President  Bush’s  decision  to
invade  Iraq  (a  nation  not  involved  in  the  events  of
9/11)  in  2003  led  to  a  protracted  war.  When  Barack
Obama was elected in 2008, the first African American
president in the nation’s history, he inherited two wars
and the Great Recession, the most significant economic
collapse since the 1930s. His, and the nation’s, efforts to
address these and other pressing issues — including the
national  debt  and  global  climate  change — remain
ongoing, unfinished business after Obama’s reelection
in 2012.

C H A P T E R   R E V I E W

M A K E  I T  S T I C K

Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read.

TERMS TO KNOW

Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key People

Osama bin Laden (p. 1024)
William (Bill) Clinton (p. 1020)
Hillary Rodham Clinton (p. 1022)
Newt Gingrich (p. 1021)
Monica Lewinsky (p. 1023)
George W. Bush (p. 1025)
Saddam Hussein (p. 1028)
Barack Obama (p. 1030)

Key Concepts and Events

Al Qaeda (p. 1002)
globalization (p. 1004)
World Trade Organization

(WTO) (p. 1004)

Group of Eight (G8) (p. 1009)
North American Free Trade

Agreement (NAFTA) (p. 1010)

multinational corporations

(p. 1010)

Advanced Research Projects

Agency Network (ARPANET)
(p. 1012)

World Wide Web (p. 1012)
culture war (p. 1012)
Immigration and Nationality Act

(p. 1012)

multiculturalism (p. 1015)
Proposition 209 (p. 1015)
Operation Rescue (p. 1019)
Defense of Marriage Act (p. 1020)

Webster v. Reproductive Health

Services (p. 1020)

Planned Parenthood of Southeast-

ern Pennsylvania v. Casey
(p. 1020)

Lawrence v. Texas (p. 1020)
Contract with America (p. 1021)
Personal Responsibility and

Work Opportunity Reconcilia-
tion Act (p. 1023)

Economic Growth and Tax Relief

Act (p. 1026)

USA PATRIOT Act (p. 1028)
Abu Ghraib prison (p. 1029)
American Recovery and Rein-

vestment Act (p. 1031)

Tea Party (p. 1031)
Patient Protection and Afford-

able Care Act (p. 1031)

