1034

PART 9

  CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Answer these questions to demonstrate your
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.

1.  What  connections  do  you  see  between  globaliza-

tion and the “culture wars” of the 1990s?

2.  In  what  ways  has  the  United  States’s  role  in  the
world changed since the end of the Cold War? In
what ways has it remained the same?

3.  How  did  immigration  to  the  United  States  in  the
last two decades of the twentieth century and the
first decade of the twenty-first benefit the American
economy but produce political backlash?

4.  THEMATIC  UNDERSTANDING  Review  the
events  included  on  the  thematic  timeline  on
page  971.  In  what  ways  does  the  period  between
1992  (Bill  Clinton’s  election)  and  2012  (Barack
Obama’s  reelection)  suggest  a  postliberal  era  in
American politics? In what ways was the conserva-
tive  resurgence  under  Reagan  preserved,  and  in
what ways was it not?

MAKING
CONNECTIONS

Recognize the larger developments and continuities within
and across chapters by answering these questions.

1.  ACROSS TIME AND PLACE  How would you
compare  the  Iraq  War  with  previous  wars  in  U.S.
history?  Compare  in  particular  the  reasons  for
entering the war, support for the war abroad and at
home, and the outcome of the conflict.

2.  VISUAL  EVIDENCE  What  does  the  photo-
graph on page 1011 convey about the technological
and  social  changes  that  the  digital  revolution has
wrought on American life?

MORE TO EXPLORE

Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

William Berman, From the Center to the Edge: The
Politics and Policies of the Clinton Presidency (2001).
An in-depth exploration of Clinton’s politics and
policies.

Richard A. Clarke, Against All Enemies: Inside Amer-
ica’s War on Terror (2004). A critique of the war on
terror from President Clinton’s former chief counter-
terrorism advisor.

Alfred Eckes Jr. and Thomas Zeilin, Globalization and
the American Century (2003). Shows that globaliza-
tion for the United States has a long history, at least
to 1898.

Gertrude Himmelfarb, One Nation, Two Cultures
(1999). A compelling explanation of the divisive
politics of the 1990s.

Barack Obama, Dreams from My Father: A Story of
Race and Inheritance (1995). The president’s first
memoir makes compelling reading.

See the September 11 Digital Archive at
911digitalarchive.org/ for oral histories and
both still and moving images from September 11.

