Documents

The Declaration of Independence
In Congress, July 4, 1776,
The Unanimous Declaration of the Thirteen United States of America

When in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary
for one people to dissolve the political bands which have con-
nected them with another, and to assume among the Powers
of the earth, the separate and equal station to which the Laws
of Nature and of Nature’s God entitle them, a decent respect
to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare
the causes which impel them to the separation.

We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are
created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with
certain unalienable rights, that among these are Life, Liberty,
and  the  pursuit  of  Happiness.  That  to  secure  these  rights,
Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just
powers from the consent of the governed. That whenever any
Form of Government becomes destructive of these ends, it is
the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to insti-
tute  new  Government,  laying  its  foundation  on  such  prin-
ciples  and  organizing  its  powers  in  such  form,  as  to  them
shall seem most likely to effect their Safety and Happiness.
Prudence, indeed, will dictate that Governments long estab-
lished should not be changed for light and transient causes;
and accordingly all experience hath shown, that mankind are
more  disposed  to  suffer,  while  evils  are  sufferable,  than  to
right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are
accustomed.  But  when  a  long  train  of  abuses  and  usurpa-
tions, pursuing invariably the same Object evinces a design
to reduce them under absolute Despotism, it is their right, it
is their duty, to throw off such Government, and to provide
new  Guards  for  their  future  security. — Such  has  been  the
patient  sufferance  of  these  Colonies;  and  such  is  now  the
necessity  which  constrains  them  to  alter  their  former  Sys-
tems  of  Government.  The  history  of  the  present  King  of
Great  Britain  is  a  history  of  repeated  injuries  and  usurpa-
tions, all having in direct object the establishment of an abso-
lute  Tyranny  over  these  States.  To  prove  this,  let  Facts  be
submitted to a candid world.

He has refused his Assent to Laws, the most wholesome

and necessary for the public good.

He has forbidden his Governors to pass Laws of imme-
diate  and  pressing  importance,  unless  suspended  in  their
operation  till  his  Assent  should  be  obtained;  and,  when  so
suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.

He has refused to pass other Laws for the accommoda-
tion  of  large  districts  of  people,  unless  those  people  would
relinquish  the  right  of  Representation  in  the  Legislature,  a
right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants only.

He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual,
uncomfortable, and distant from the depository of their pub-
lic Records, for the sole purpose of fatiguing them into com-
pliance with his measures.

He  has  dissolved  Representative  Houses  repeatedly,  for
opposing with manly firmness his invasions on the rights of
the people.

He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to
cause  others  to  be  elected;  whereby  the  Legislative  powers,
incapable  of  Annihilation,  have  returned  to  the  People  at
large for their exercise; the State remaining in the mean time
exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without and con-
vulsions within.

He has endeavoured to prevent the population of these
States; for that purpose obstructing the Laws of Naturaliza-
tion of Foreigners; refusing to pass others to encourage their
migrations hither, and raising the conditions of new Appro-
priations of Lands.

He  has  obstructed  the  Administration  of  Justice,  by
refusing his Assent to Laws for establishing Judiciary powers.
He has made Judges dependent on his Will alone, for the
tenure of their offices, and the amount and payment of their
salaries.

He  has  erected  a  multitude  of  New  Offices,  and  sent
hither swarms of Officers to harass our People, and eat out
their substance.

He has kept among us, in times of peace, Standing Armies

without the Consent of our legislature.

He  has  combined  with  others  to  subject  us  to  a  juris-
diction  foreign  to  our  constitution,  and  unacknowledged
by  our  laws;  giving  his  Assent  to  their  Acts  of  pretended
Legislation:

For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:
For protecting them, by a mock Trial, from Punishment
for any Murders which they should commit on the Inhabi-
tants of these States:

For cutting off our Trade with all parts of the world:

  D-1

