D-2

Documents

For imposing taxes on us without our Consent:
For depriving us, in many cases, of the benefits of Trial

by jury:

For transporting us beyond Seas to be tried for pretended

offences:

For  abolishing  the  free  System  of  English  Laws  in  a
neighbouring  Province,  establishing  therein  an  Arbitrary
government, and enlarging its Boundaries so as to render it
at  once  an  example  and  fit  instrument  for  introducing  the
same absolute rule into these Colonies:

For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most val-
uable  Laws,  and  altering  fundamentally  the  Forms  of  our
Governments:

For  suspending  our  own  Legislatures,  and  declaring
themselves invested with Power to legislate for us in all cases
whatsoever.

He has abdicated Government here, by declaring us out

of his Protection and waging War against us.

He  has  plundered  our  seas,  ravaged  our  Coasts,  burnt

our towns, and destroyed the lives of our people.

He  is  at  this  time  transporting  large  armies  of  foreign
mercenaries to compleat the works of death, desolation, and
tyranny, already begun with circumstances of Cruelty & per-
fidy  scarcely  paralleled  in  the  most  barbarous  ages,  and
totally unworthy the Head of a civilized nation.

He has constrained our fellow Citizens taken Captive on
the high Seas to bear Arms against their Country, to become
the  executioners  of  their  friends  and  Brethren,  or  to  fall
themselves by their Hands.

He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and
has endeavoured to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers,
the merciless Indian Savages, whose known rule of warfare,
is  an  undistinguished  destruction  of  all  ages,  sexes,  and
conditions.

In every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned
for  Redress  in  the  most  humble  terms:  Our  repeated  Peti-
tions have been answered only by repeated injury. A Prince,
whose  character  is  thus  marked  by  every  act  which  may
define a Tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.

Nor  have  We  been  wanting  in  attention  to  our  British
brethren. We have warned them from time to time of attempts
by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction
over us. We have reminded them of the circumstances of our
emigration and settlement here. We  have appealed to their
native justice and magnanimity, and we have conjured them
by the ties of our common kindred to disavow these usurpa-
tions, which would inevitably interrupt our connections and
correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of jus-
tice and of consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in
the  necessity,  which  denounces  our  Separation,  and  hold
them,  as  we  hold  the  rest  of  mankind,  Enemies  in  War,  in
Peace Friends.

We, therefore, the Representatives of the United States of
America, in General Congress, Assembled, appealing to the
Supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of our inten-
tions, do, in the Name, and by Authority of the good People
of these Colonies, solemnly publish and declare, That these
United Colonies are, and of Right ought to be FREE AND
INDEPENDENT  STATES;  that  they  are  Absolved  from  all
Allegiance  to  the  British  Crown,  and  that  all  political  con-
nection between them and the State of Great Britain, is and
ought to be totally dissolved; and that as Free and Indepen-
dent States, they have full Power to levy War, conclude Peace,
contract Alliances, establish Commerce, and to do all other
Acts and Things which Independent States may of right do.
And for the support of this Declaration, with a firm reliance
on the Protection of Divine Providence, we mutually pledge
to each other our Lives, our Fortunes, and our sacred Honor.

Button Gwinnett
Lyman Hall
Geo. Walton
Wm. Hooper
Joseph Hewes
John Penn
Edward Rutledge
Thos. Heyward, Junr.
Thomas Lynch, Junr.
Arthur Middleton
Samuel Chase
Wm. Paca
Thos. Stone
Charles Carroll of Carrollton

George Wythe
Richard Henry Lee
Th. Jefferson
Benja. Harrison
Thos. Nelson, Jr.
Francis Lightfoot Lee
Carter Braxton
Robt. Morris
Benjamin Rush
Benja. Franklin
John Morton
Geo. Clymer
Jas. Smith
Geo. Taylor

John Hancock

James Wilson
Geo. Ross
Caesar Rodney
Geo. Read
Thos. M’Kean
Wm. Floyd
Phil. Livingston
Frans. Lewis
Lewis Morris
Richd. Stockton
John Witherspoon
Fras. Hopkinson
John Hart
Abra. Clark

Josiah Bartlett
Wm. Whipple
Matthew Thornton
Saml. Adams
John Adams
Robt. Treat Paine
Elbridge Gerry
Step. Hopkins
William Ellery
Roger Sherman
Sam’el Huntington
Wm. Williams
Oliver Wolcott

