To  raise  and  support  Armies,  but  no  Appropriation  of
Money to that Use shall be for a longer Term than two Years;

To provide and maintain a Navy;
To make Rules for the Government and Regulation of the

land and naval Forces;

To  provide  for  calling  forth  the  Militia  to  execute  the
Laws of the Union, suppress Insurrections and repel Invasions;
To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining the
Militia,  and  for  governing  such  Part  of  them  as  may  be
employed in the Service of the United States, reserving to the
States respectively, the Appointment of the Officers, and the
Authority of training the Militia according to the discipline
prescribed by Congress;

To exercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatsoever,
over such District (not exceeding ten Miles square) as may,
by Cession of particular States, and the acceptance of Con-
gress, become the Seat of Government of the United States,
and to  exercise like Authority over all Places  purchased by
the Consent of the Legislature of the State in which the Same
shall be, for the Erection of Forts, Magazines, Arsenals, dock-
Yards, and other needful Buildings; — And

To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for
carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other
Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the
United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof.

Section  9. The Migration or Importation of such  Per-
sons as any of the States now existing shall think proper to
admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress prior to the
Year one thousand eight hundred and eight but a tax or duty
may be imposed on such Importation, not exceeding ten dol-
lars for each Person.

The privilege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be
suspended,  unless  when  in  Cases  of  Rebellion  or  Invasion
the public Safety may require it.

No Bill of Attainder or ex post facto Law shall be passed.
No capitation, or other direct, Tax shall be laid, unless in
Proportion  to  the  Census  or  Enumeration  herein  before
directed to be taken.*

No Tax or Duty shall be laid on Articles exported from

any State.

No Preference shall be given by any Regulation of Com-
merce  or  Revenue  to  the  Ports  of  one  State  over  those  of
another:  nor  shall  Vessels  bound  to,  or  from,  one  State,  be
obliged to enter, clear, or pay Duties in another.

No Money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in Con-
sequence  of  Appropriations  made  by  law;  and  a  regular
Statement and Account of the Receipts and Expenditures of
all public Money shall be published from time to time.

*Changed by the Sixteenth Amendment.

Documents

D-5

No Title of Nobility shall be granted by the United States:
And no Person holding any Office of Profit or Trust under
them, shall, without the Consent of the Congress, accept of
any present, Emolument, Office, or Title, of any kind what-
ever, from any King, Prince, or foreign State.

Section  10.  No  State  shall  enter  into  any  Treaty,  Alli-
ance, or Confederation; grant Letters of Marque and Repri-
sal;  coin  Money;  emit  Bills  of  Credit;  make  any  Thing  but
gold and silver Coin a Tender in Payment of Debts; pass any
Bill  of  Attainder,  ex  post  facto  Law,  or  Law  impairing  the
Obligation of Contracts, or grant any Title of Nobility.

No State shall, without the Consent of the Congress, lay
any Imposts or Duties on Imports or Exports, except what
may  be  absolutely  necessary  for  executing  its  inspection
Laws: and the net Produce of all Duties and Imposts, laid by
any State on Imports or Exports, shall be for the Use of the
Treasury of the United States; and all such Laws shall be sub-
ject to the Revision and Control of the Congress.

No State shall, without the Consent of the Congress, lay
any duty of Tonnage, keep Troops, or Ships of War in time of
Peace, enter into any Agreement or Compact with another
State, or with a foreign Power, or engage in War, unless actu-
ally invaded, or in such imminent Danger as will not admit
of delay.

Article II

Section 1. The executive Power shall be vested in a Pres-
ident of the United States of America. He shall hold his Office
during the Term of four Years, and, together with the Vice
President, chosen for the same Term, be elected, as follows:

Each State shall appoint, in such Manner as the Legisla-
ture thereof may direct, a Number of Electors, equal to the
whole Number of Senators and Representatives to which the
State may be entitled in the Congress; but no Senator or Rep-
resentative,  or  Person  holding  an  Office  of  Trust  or  Profit
under the United States, shall be appointed an Elector.

The Electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote
by Ballot for two Persons, of whom one at least shall not be an
Inhabitant of the same State with themselves. And they shall
make a List of all the Persons voted for, and of the Number of
Votes for each; which List they shall sign and certify, and trans-
mit sealed to the Seat of the Government of the United States,
directed  to  the  President  of  the  Senate.  The  President  of  the
Senate shall, in the Presence of the Senate and House of Repre-
sentatives, open all the Certificates, and the Votes shall then be
counted. The Person having the greatest Number of Votes shall
be the President, if such Number be a Majority of the whole
Number of Electors appointed; and if there be more than one
who have such Majority, and have an equal Number of Votes,
then the House of Representatives shall immediately chuse by

