Documents

D-7

The Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make all
needful  Rules  and  Regulations  respecting  the  Territory  or
other Property belonging to the United States; and nothing
in this Constitution shall be so construed as to Prejudice any
Claims of the United States, or of any particular State.

Section  4.  The  United  States  shall  guarantee  to  every
State in this Union a Republican Form of Government, and
shall protect each of them against Invasion; and on Applica-
tion of the Legislature, or of the Executive (when the Legisla-
ture cannot be convened) against domestic Violence.

Article V
The  Congress,  whenever  two-thirds  of  both  Houses  shall
deem it necessary, shall propose Amendments to this Consti-
tution, or, on the Application of the Legislatures of two-thirds
of  the  several  States,  shall  call  a  Convention  for  proposing
Amendments,  which,  in  either  Case,  shall  be  valid  to  all
Intents and Purposes, as Part of this Constitution, when rati-
fied by the Legislatures of three-fourths of the several States,
or by Conventions in three-fourths thereof, as the one or the
other Mode of Ratification may be proposed by the Congress;
Provided that no Amendment which may be made prior to the
Year One thousand eight hundred and eight shall in any Man-
ner affect the first and fourth Clauses in the Ninth Section of the
first Article; and that no State, without its Consent, shall be
deprived of its equal Suffrage in the Senate.

Article VI
All  Debts  contracted  and  Engagements  entered  into,  before
the  Adoption  of  this  Constitution,  shall  be  as  valid  against
the  United  States  under  this  Constitution,  as  under  the
Confederation.

This  Constitution,  and  the  Laws  of  the  United  States
which shall be made in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties
made,  or  which  shall  be  made,  under  the  Authority  of  the
United  States,  shall  be  the  supreme  Law  of  the  Land;  and
the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing
in  the  Constitution  or  Laws  of  any  State  to  the  Contrary
notwithstanding.

The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and
the Members of the several State Legislatures, and all execu-
tive and judicial Officers, both of the United States and of the
several  States,  shall  be  bound  by  Oath  or  Affirmation,  to
support  this  Constitution;  but  no  religious  Test  shall  ever
be required as a Qualification to any Office or public Trust
under the United States.

Grants of different States, and between a State, or the Citi-
zens thereof, and foreign States, Citizens or Subjects.

In all Cases affecting Ambassadors, other public Minis-
ters and Consuls, and those in which a State shall be Party,
the supreme Court shall have original Jurisdiction. In all the
other Cases before mentioned, the supreme Court shall have
appellate  Jurisdiction,  both  as  to  Law  and  Fact,  with  such
Exceptions,  and  under  such  Regulations  as  the  Congress
shall make.

The trial of all Crimes, except in Cases of Impeachment,
shall  be  by  Jury;  and  such  Trial  shall  be  held  in  the  State
where said Crimes shall have been committed; but when not
committed within any State, the Trial shall be at such Place or
Places as the Congress may by Law have directed.

Section  3.  Treason  against  the  United  States,  shall
consist  only  in  levying  War  against  them,  or  in  adhering
to their Enemies, giving them Aid and Comfort. No Person
shall be convicted of Treason unless on the Testimony of two
Witnesses to the same overt Act, or on Confession in open
Court.

The  Congress  shall  have  Power  to  declare  the  Punish-
ment  of  Treason,  but  no  Attainder  of  Treason  shall  work
Corruption of Blood, or Forefeiture except during the Life of
the Person attainted.

Article IV

Section 1. Full Faith and Credit shall be given in each
State to the public Acts, Records, and judicial Proceedings of
every  other  State.  And  the  Congress  may  by  general  Laws
prescribe the Manner in which such Acts, Records, and Pro-
ceedings shall be proved, and the Effect thereof.

Section 2. The Citizens of each State shall be entitled to
all Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the several States.
A Person charged  in any State  with Treason, Felony, or
other  Crime,  who  shall  flee  from  Justice,  and  be  found  in
another State, shall on demand of the executive Authority of
the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed
to the State having Jurisdiction of the Crime.

No Person held to Service or Labour in one State, under the
Laws thereof, escaping into another, shall, in Consequence of
any Law or Regulation therein, be discharged from such Ser-
vice or Labour, but shall be delivered up on Claim of the Party
to whom such Service or Labour may be due.*

Section 3. New States may be admitted by the Congress
into this Union; but no new State shall be formed or erected
within  the Jurisdiction of any other State; nor any State  be
formed  by  the  Junction  of  two  or  more  States,  or  parts  of
States, without the Consent of the Legislatures of the States
concerned as well as of the Congress.

*Superseded by the Thirteenth Amendment.

