United States, shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion
against  the  same,  or  given  aid  or  comfort  to  the  enemies
thereof. Congress may, by a vote of two-thirds of each house,
remove such disability.

Section 4. The validity of the public debt of the United
States, authorized by law, including debts incurred for pay-
ment  of  pensions  and  bounties  for  services  in  suppressing
insurrection  or  rebellion,  shall  not  be  questioned.  But  nei-
ther the United States nor any State shall assume or pay any
debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or rebellion
against the United States, or any claim for the loss or emanci-
pation of any slave; but all such debts, obligations, and claims
shall be held illegal and void.

Section 5. The Congress shall have power to enforce, by

appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article.

Amendment XV [1870]

Section 1. The right of citizens of the United States to
vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or
by any State on account of race, color, or previous condition
of servitude —

Section  2.  The  Congress  shall  have  power  to  enforce

this article by appropriate legislation.

Amendment XVI [1913]
The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on
incomes,  from  whatever  source  derived,  without  appor-
tionment among the several States, and without regard to
any census or enumeration.

Amendment XVII [1913]

Section 1. The Senate of the United States shall be com-
posed of two Senators from each State, elected by the people
thereof, for six years; and each Senator shall have one vote.
The electors in each State shall have the qualifications requi-
site for electors of [voters for] the most numerous branch of
the State legislatures.

Section  2.  When  vacancies  happen  in  the  representa-
tion of any State in the Senate, the executive authority of such
State shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies: Provided,
that the Legislature of any State may empower the executive
thereof to make temporary appointments until the people fill
the vacancies by election as the Legislature may direct.

Section 3. This amendment shall not be so construed as
to  affect  the  election  or  term  of  any  Senator  chosen  before  it
becomes valid as part of the Constitution.

Amendment  XVIII  [1919;  repealed  1933  by
Amendment XXI]

Section 1. After one year from the ratification of this ar-
ticle  the  manufacture,  sale,  or  transportation  of  intoxicating
liquors within, the importation thereof into, or the exportation

Documents

D-11

thereof  from  the  United  States  and  all  territory  subject  to  the
jurisdiction thereof, for beverage purposes, is hereby prohibited.

Section 2. The Congress and the several States shall have
concurrent power to enforce this article by appropriate legisla-
tion.

Section 3. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall
have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the
legislatures of the several States, as provided by the Constitu-
tion, within seven years from the date of the submission thereof
to the States by the Congress.

Amendment XIX [1920]

Section 1. The right of citizens of the United States to
vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or
by any State on account of sex.

Section 2. Congress shall have the power to enforce this

article by appropriate legislation.

Unratified Amendment
Child Labor Amendment
(proposed by Congress June 2, 1924)

Section 1. The Congress shall have power to limit, regulate,

and prohibit the labor of persons under eighteen years of age.

Section 2. The power of the several States is unimpaired
by this article except that the operation of State laws shall be
suspended  to  the  extent  necessary  to  give  effect  to  legislation
enacted by Congress.

Amendment XX [1933]

Section 1. The terms of the President and Vice-President
shall end at noon on the 20th day of January, and the terms
of  Senators  and  Representatives  at  noon  on  the  3rd  day  of
January, of the years in which such terms would have ended
if this article had not been ratified; and the terms of their suc-
cessors shall then begin.

Section  2.  The  Congress  shall  assemble  at  least  once
in every year, and such meeting shall begin at noon on the 3rd
day of January, unless they shall by law appoint a different day.
Section 3. If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the
term of the President, the President-elect shall have died, the
Vice-President-elect  shall  become  President.  If  a  President
shall  not  have  been  chosen  before  the  time  fixed  for  the
beginning of his term, or if the President-elect shall have failed
to qualify, then the Vice-President-elect shall act as President
until a President shall have qualified; and the Congress may
by law provide for the case wherein neither a President-elect
nor  a  Vice-President-elect  shall  have  qualified,  declaring
who shall then act as President, or the manner in which one
who  is  to  act  shall  be  selected,  and  such  person  shall  act
accordingly  until  a  President  or  Vice-President  shall  have
qualified.

