Documents

D-13

the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of
his office. Thereupon Congress shall decide the issue, assem-
bling within forty-eight hours for that purpose if not in ses-
sion. If the Congress, within twenty-one days after receipt of
the latter written declaration, or, if Congress is not in session,
within twenty-one days after Congress is required to assemble,
determines by two-thirds vote of both Houses that the Presi-
dent is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office,
the  Vice-President  shall  continue  to  discharge  the  same  as
Acting President; otherwise, the President shall resume the
powers and duties of his office.

Amendment XXVI [1971]

Section 1. The right of citizens of the United States, who
are eighteen years of age or older, to vote shall not be denied
or abridged by the United States or by any State on account
of age.

Section 2. The Congress shall have the power to enforce,

by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article.

Section  3.  This  amendment  shall  take  effect  two  years

after the date of ratification.

Unratified Amendment
District of Columbia Statehood Amendment (proposed by
Congress August 22, 1978)

Section 1. For purposes of representation in the Congress,
election of the President and Vice President, and article V of this
Constitution, the District constituting the seat of government
of the United States shall be treated as though it were a State.

Section 2. The exercise of the rights and powers conferred
under  this  article  shall  be  by  the  people  of  the  District  con-
stituting the seat of government, and as shall be provided by
Congress.

Section  2.  The  Congress  shall  have  power  to  enforce

Section 3. The twenty-third article of amendment to the

this article by appropriate legislation.

Unratified Amendment
Equal Rights Amendment (proposed by Congress March 22,
1972; seven-year deadline for ratification extended to June
30, 1982)

Section  1. Equality of rights under the law shall not be
denied  or  abridged  by  the  United  States  or  by  any  State  on
account of sex.

Constitution of the United States is hereby repealed.

Section 4. This article shall be inoperative, unless it shall
have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the
legislatures of three-fourths of the several states within seven
years from the date of its submission.

Amendment XXVII [1992]
No law varying the compensation for the services of the
Senators  and  Representatives,  shall  take  effect,  until  an
election of Representatives shall have intervened.

