Glossary

abolitionism: The social reform movement to end slavery immedi-
ately and without compensation that began in the United States
in the 1830s. (p. 357)

Abu  Ghraib  prison:  A  prison  just  outside  Baghdad,  Iraq,  where
American guards were photographed during the Iraq War abus-
ing and torturing suspected insurgents. (p. 1029)

Adams-Onís Treaty: An 1819 treaty in which John Quincy Adams
persuaded  Spain  to  cede  the  Florida  territory  to  the  United
States.  In  return,  the  American  government  accepted  Spain’s
claim  to  Texas  and  agreed  to  a  compromise  on  the  western
boundary for the state of Louisiana. (p. 243)

America First Committee: A committee organized by isolationists
in 1940 to oppose the entrance of the United States into World
War  II.  The  membership  of  the  committee  included  senators,
journalists,  and  publishers  and  such  well-respected  figures  as
the aviator Charles Lindbergh. (p. 771)

American, or Know-Nothing, Party: A political party formed in
1851 that drew on the anti-immigrant and anti-Catholic move-
ments of the 1840s. In 1854, the party gained control of the state
governments of Massachusetts and Pennsylvania. (p. 432)

American Civil Liberties Union: An organization formed during

the Red Scare to protect free speech rights. (p. 713)

Adkins v. Children’s Hospital: The 1923 Supreme Court case that
voided a minimum wage for women workers in the District of
Columbia, reversing many of the gains that had been achieved
through the groundbreaking decision in Muller v. Oregon. (p. 707)

American Colonization Society: A society founded by Henry Clay
and other prominent citizens in 1817. The society argued that
slaves had to be freed and then resettled, in Africa or elsewhere.
(p. 267)

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  Network  (ARPANET):  A
decentralized  computer  network  developed  in  the  late  1960s
by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Defense  in  conjunction  with  the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The Internet grew out of
the ARPANET. (p. 1012)

affirmative action: Policies established in the 1960s and 1970s by
governments, businesses, universities, and other institutions to
overcome  the  effects  of  past  discrimination  against  specific
groups such as racial and ethnic minorities and women. Mea-
sures to ensure equal opportunity include setting goals for the
admission,  hiring,  and  promotion  of  minorities;  considering
minority status when allocating resources; and actively encour-
aging victims of past discrimination to apply for jobs and other
resources. (p. 950)

The Affluent Society: A 1958 book by John Kenneth Galbraith that
analyzed the nation’s successful middle class and argued that the
poor  were  only  an  “afterthought”  in  the  minds  of  economists
and politicians. (p. 843)

Agricultural Adjustment Act: New Deal legislation passed in May
1933 that aimed at cutting agricultural production to raise crop
prices and thus farmers’ income. (p. 741)

Al  Qaeda:  A  network  of  radical  Islamic  terrorists  organized  by
Osama bin Laden, who issued a call for holy war against Ameri-
cans and their allies. Members of Al Qaeda were responsible for
the 9/11 terrorist attacks. (p. 1002)

Alamo: The 1836 defeat by the Mexican army of the Texan garrison
defending the Alamo in San Antonio. Newspapers urged Amer-
icans  to  “Remember  the  Alamo,”  and  American  adventurers,
lured by offers of land grants, flocked to Texas to join the rebel
forces. (p. 391)

amalgamation: A term for racial mixing and intermarriage, almost
universally opposed by whites in the nineteenth-century United
States. (p. 364)

American  exceptionalism:  The  idea  that  the  United  States  has  a
unique destiny to foster democracy and civilization on the world
stage. (p. 674)

American  Federation  of  Labor:  Organization  created  by  Samuel
Gompers in 1886 that coordinated the activities of craft unions
and  called  for  direct  negotiation  with  employers  in  order  to
achieve benefits for skilled workers. (p. 570)

American GI Forum: A group founded by World War II veterans
in Corpus Christi, Texas, in 1948 to protest the poor treatment
of Mexican American soldiers and veterans. (p. 877)

American Indian Movement (AIM): Organization established in
1968 to address the problems Indians faced in American cities,
including poverty and police harassment. AIM organized Indi-
ans to end relocation and termination policies and to win greater
control over their cultures and communities. (p. 898)

American  Protective  Association:  A  powerful  political  organi-
zation of militant Protestants, which for a brief period in the
1890s  counted  more  than  two  million  members.  In  its  viru-
lent anti-Catholicism and calls for restrictions on immigrants,
the  APA  prefigured  the  revived  Ku  Klux  Klan  of  the  1920s.
(p. 600)

American Recovery and Reinvestment Act: An economic stimu-
lus bill passed in 2009, in response to the Great Recession, that
provided $787 billion to state and local governments for schools,
hospitals, and transportation projects. It  was one of the largest
single  packages  of  government  spending  in  American  history.
(p. 1031)

American  Renaissance:  A  literary  explosion  during  the  1840s
inspired in part by Emerson’s ideas on the liberation of the indi-
vidual. (p. 346)

American  System:  The  mercantilist  system  of  national  economic
development  advocated  by  Henry  Clay  and  adopted  by  John
Quincy  Adams,  with  a  national  bank  to  manage  the  nation’s

  G-1

