G-2

Glossary

financial  system;  protective  tariffs  to  provide  revenue  and
encourage industry; and a nationally funded network of roads,
canals, and railroads. (p. 319)

American Temperance Society: A society invigorated by evangeli-
cal Protestants in 1832 that set out to curb the consumption of
alcoholic beverages. (p. 310)

American Woman Suffrage Association: A women’s suffrage orga-
nization  led  by  Lucy  Stone,  Henry  Blackwell,  and  others  who
remained  loyal  to  the  Republican  Party,  despite  its  failure  to
include  women’s  voting  rights  in  the  Reconstruction  Amend-
ments. Stressing the urgency of voting rights for African Ameri-
can men, AWSA leaders held out hope that once Reconstruction
had been settled, it would be women’s turn. (p. 486)

anarchism: The advocacy of a stateless society achieved by revolu-
tionary means. Feared for their views, anarchists became scape-
goats for the 1886 Haymarket Square bombing. (p. 568)

animism: Spiritual beliefs that center on the natural world. Animists
do not worship a supernatural God; instead, they pay homage to
spirits and spiritual forces that they believe dwell in the natural
world. (p. 17)

Antifederalists:  Opponents  of  ratification  of  the  Constitution.
Antifederalists  feared  that  a  powerful  and  distant  central  gov-
ernment would be out of touch with the needs of citizens. They
also complained that it failed to guarantee individual liberties in
a bill of rights. (p. 207)

Articles of Confederation: The written document defining the struc-
ture of the government from 1781 to 1788, under which the Union
was a confederation of equal states, with no executive and limited
powers, existing mainly to foster a common defense. (p. 200)

artisan  republicanism:  An  ideology  that  celebrated  small-scale
producers,  men  and  women  who  owned  their  own  shops  (or
farms). It defined the ideal republican society as one constituted
by,  and  dedicated  to  the  welfare  of,  independent  workers  and
citizens. (p. 291)

Alexander Hamilton argued that the bank would provide stabil-
ity  to  the  specie-starved  American  economy  by  making  loans
to merchants, handling government funds, and issuing bills of
credit. (p. 218)

Battle of Little Big Horn: The 1876 battle begun when American
cavalry  under  George  Armstrong  Custer  attacked  an  encamp-
ment  of  Sioux,  Arapaho,  and  Cheyenne  Indians  who  resisted
removal to a reservation. Custer’s force was annihilated, but with
whites calling for U.S. soldiers to retaliate, the Native American
military victory was short-lived. (p. 533)

Battle of Long Island (1776): First major engagement of the new
Continental army, defending against 32,000 British troops out-
side of New York City. (p. 184)

Battle of Saratoga (1777): A multistage battle in New York ending
with the surrender of British general John Burgoyne. The victory
ensured the diplomatic success of American representatives in
Paris, who won a military alliance with France. (p. 187)

Battle of Tippecanoe: An attack on Shawnee Indians at Prophets-
town  on  the  Tippecanoe  River  in  1811  by  American  forces
headed by William Henry Harrison, Indiana’s territorial gover-
nor. The governor’s troops traded heavy casualties with the con-
federacy’s warriors and then destroyed the holy village. (p. 236)

Battle of Yorktown (1781): A battle in which French and American
troops  and  a  French  fleet  trapped  the  British  army  under  the
command of General Charles Cornwallis at Yorktown, Virginia.
The  Franco-American  victory  broke  the  resolve  of  the  British
government. (p. 195)

Bay of Pigs: A failed U.S.-sponsored invasion of Cuba in 1961 by
anti-Castro forces who planned to overthrow Fidel Castro’s gov-
ernment. (p. 830)

Beats: A small group of literary figures based in New York City and
San Francisco in the 1950s who rejected mainstream culture and
instead celebrated personal freedom, which often included drug
consumption and casual sex. (p. 849)

associated state: A system of voluntary business cooperation with
government.  The  Commerce  Department  helped  create  two
thousand trade associations representing companies in almost
every major industry. (p. 710)

Benevolent Empire: A broad-ranging campaign of moral and insti-
tutional  reforms  inspired  by  evangelical  Christian  ideals  and
endorsed by upper-middle-class men and women in the 1820s
and 1830s. (p. 305)

Atlanta Compromise: An 1895 address by Booker T. Washington
that urged whites and African Americans to work together for
the progress of all. Delivered at the Cotton States Exposition in
Atlanta, the speech was widely interpreted as approving racial
segregation. (p. 587)

Atlantic Charter: A press release by President Roosevelt and Brit-
ish prime minister Winston Churchill in August 1941 calling for
economic  cooperation,  national  self-determination,  and  guar-
antees of political stability after the war. (p. 772)

baby boom: The surge in the American birthrate between 1945 and
1965, which peaked in 1957 with 4.3 million births. (p. 850)

Bakke v. University of California: 1978 Supreme Court ruling that
limited affirmative action by rejecting a quota system. (p. 951)

Bank of the United States: A bank chartered in 1790 and jointly
owned  by  private  stockholders  and  the  national  government.

benevolent  masters:  Slave  owners  who  considered  themselves

committed to the welfare of their slaves. (p. 382)

Bill of Rights: The first ten amendments to the Constitution, offi-
cially ratified by 1791. The amendments safeguarded fundamen-
tal  personal  rights,  including  freedom  of  speech  and  religion,
and mandated legal procedures, such as trial by jury. (p. 216)

Black  Codes:  Laws  passed  by  southern  states  after  the  Civil  War
that denied ex-slaves the civil rights enjoyed by whites, punished
vague crimes such as “vagrancy” or failing to have a labor con-
tract, and tried to force African Americans back to plantation labor
systems that closely mirrored those in slavery times. (p. 481)

black  nationalism:  a  major  strain  of  African  American  thought
that  emphasized  black  racial  pride  and  autonomy.  Present  in
black communities for centuries, it periodically came to the fore,
as  in  Marcus  Garvey’s  pan-Africanist  movement  in  the  early

