Glossary

G-3

twentieth century and in various organizations in the 1960s and
1970s, such as the Nation of Islam and the Black Panther Party.
(p. 892)

Chicago school: A school of architecture dedicated to the design of
buildings  whose  form  expressed,  rather  than  masked,  their
structure and function. (p. 608)

Black Panther Party: A militant organization dedicated to protect-
ing African Americans from police violence, founded in Oak-
land, California, in 1966 by Huey Newton and Bobby Seale. In
the  late  1960s  the  organization  spread  to  other  cities,  where
members  undertook  a  wide  range  of  community-organizing
projects, but the Panthers’ radicalism and belief in armed self-
defense resulted in violent clashes with police. (p. 894)

black Protestantism: A form of Protestantism that was devised by
Christian  slaves  in  the  Chesapeake  and  spread  to  the  Cotton
South as a result of the domestic slave trade. It emphasized the
evangelical  message  of  emotional  conversion,  ritual  baptism,
communal spirituality, and the idea that blacks were “children of
God” and should be treated accordingly. (p. 395)

“Bleeding  Kansas”:  Term  for  the  bloody  struggle  between  pro-
slavery and antislavery factions in Kansas following its organiza-
tion as a territory in the fall of 1854. (p. 433)

blues: A form of American music that originated in the Deep South,
especially from the black workers in the cotton fields of the Mis-
sissippi Delta. (p. 618)

Bonus Army: A group of 15,000 unemployed World War I veterans
who set up camps near the Capitol building in 1932 to demand
immediate payment of pension awards due to be paid in 1945.
(p. 738)

Bretton Woods: An international conference in New Hampshire in
July 1944 that established the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund (IMF). (p. 840)

Brotherhood  of  Sleeping  Car  Porters:  A  prominent  black  trade
union of railroad car porters working for the Pullman Company.
(p. 873)

Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka: Supreme Court ruling that
overturned  the  “separate  but  equal”  precedent  established  in
Plessy v. Ferguson in 1896. The Court declared that separate edu-
cational facilities were inherently unequal and thus violated the
Fourteenth Amendment. (p. 878)

Burlingame Treaty:  An  1868  treaty  that  guaranteed  the  rights  of
U.S. missionaries in China and set official terms for the emigra-
tion of Chinese laborers to work in the United States. (p. 511)

Californios:  The  elite  Mexican  ranchers  in  the  province  of  Cali-

fornia. (p. 415)

carpetbaggers: A derisive name given by ex-Confederates to north-
erners  who,  motivated  by  idealism  or  the  search  for  personal
opportunity or profit, moved to the South during Reconstruc-
tion. (p. 493)

caucus: A meeting held by a political party to choose candidates,

make policies, and enforce party discipline. (p. 318)

chattel  principle:  A  system  of  bondage  in  which  a  slave  has  the
legal status of property and so can be bought and sold. (p. 381)

chattel slavery: A system of bondage in which a slave has the legal
status of property and so can be bought and sold like property.
(p. 40)

Chicano Moratorium Committee: Group founded by activist Lati-

nos to protest the Vietnam War. (p. 923)

Chinese Exclusion Act: The 1882 law that barred Chinese laborers
from entering the United States. It continued in effect until the
1940s. (p. 561)

Christianity: A religion that holds the belief that Jesus Christ was
himself divine. For centuries, the Roman Catholic Church was
the  great  unifying  institution  in  Western  Europe,  and  it  was
from Europe that Christianity spread to the Americas. (p. 21)

“City  Beautiful”  movement:  A  turn-of-the-twentieth-century
landscape  beautification,  play-

movement  that  advocated
grounds, and more and better urban parks. (p. 626)

civic humanism: The belief that individuals owe a service to their
community and its government. During the Renaissance, politi-
cal theorists argued that selfless service to the polity was of criti-
cal importance in a self-governing republic. (p. 20)

Civil Rights Act of 1866: Legislation passed by Congress that nul-
lified  the  Black  Codes  and  affirmed  that  African  Americans
should have equal benefit of the law. (p. 481)

Civil Rights Act of 1875: A law that required “full and equal” access
to  jury  service  and  to  transportation  and  public  accommoda-
tions, irrespective of race. (p. 496)

Civil Rights Act of 1964: Law that responded to demands of the
civil  rights  movement  by  making  discrimination  in  employ-
ment, education, and public accommodations illegal. It was the
strongest  such  measure  since  Reconstruction  and  included  a
ban on sex discrimination in employment. (p. 890)

Civil Rights Cases: A series of 1883 Supreme Court decisions that
struck  down  the  Civil  Rights  Act  of  1875,  rolling  back  key
Reconstruction laws and paving the way for later decisions that
sanctioned segregation. (p. 500)

Civilian  Conservation  Corps:  Federal  relief  program  that  pro-
vided  jobs  to  millions  of  unemployed  young  men  who  built
thousands of bridges, roads, trails, and other structures in state
and national parks, bolstering the national infrastructure. (p. 741)

classical  liberalism,  or  laissez-faire:  The  principle  that  the  less
government  does,  the  better,  particularly  in  reference  to  the
economy. (p. 332)

classical  liberalism:  The  political  ideology  of  individual  liberty,
private property, a competitive market economy, free trade, and
limited  government.  The  idea  being  that  the  less  government
does,  the  better,  particularly  in  reference  to  economic  policies
such as tariffs and incentives for industrial development. Attack-
ing corruption and defending private property, late-nineteenth-
century  liberals  generally  called  for  elite  governance  and
questioned  the  advisability  of  full  democratic  participation.
(p. 498)

Clayton Antitrust Act: A 1914 law that strengthened federal defi-
nitions  of  “monopoly”  and  gave  more  power  to  the  Justice
Department to pursue antitrust cases; it also specified that labor

