G-4

Glossary

unions could not generally be prosecuted for “restraint of trade,”
ensuring that antitrust laws would apply to corporations rather
than unions. (p. 662)

closed shop: A workplace in which a job seeker had to be a union
member to gain employment. The closed shop was advocated by
craft unions as a method of keeping out lower-wage workers and
strengthening the unions’ bargaining position with employers.
(p. 570)

coastal trade: The domestic slave trade with routes along the Atlan-
tic  coast  that  sent  thousands  of  slaves  to  sugar  plantations  in
Louisiana and cotton plantations in the Mississippi Valley. (p. 380)

code talkers:  Native  American  soldiers  trained  to  use native  lan-
guages to send messages in battle during World War II. Neither
the Japanese nor the Germans could decipher the codes used by
these Navajo, Comanche, Choctaw, and Cherokee speakers, and
the  messages  they  sent  gave  the  Allies  great  advantage  in  the
battle of Iwo Jima, among many others. (p. 776)

Coercive Acts: Four British acts of 1774 meant to punish Massa-
chusetts for the destruction of three shiploads of tea. Known in
America as the Intolerable Acts, they led to open rebellion in the
northern colonies. (p. 168)

Cold War liberalism: A combination of moderate liberal policies
that preserved the programs of the New Deal welfare state and
forthright anticommunism that vilified the Soviet Union abroad
and radicalism at home. Adopted by President Truman and the
Democratic Party during the late 1940s and early 1950s. (p. 818)

collective  bargaining:  A  process  of  negotiation  between  labor
unions and employers, which after World War II translated into
rising wages, expanding benefits, and an increasing rate of home
ownership. (p. 844)

Columbian  Exchange:  The  massive  global  exchange  of  living
things, including people, animals, plants, and diseases, between
the Eastern and Western Hemispheres that began after the voy-
ages of Columbus. (p. 43)

Committee  on  Public  Information:  An  organization  set  up  by
President  Woodrow  Wilson  during  World  War  I  to  increase
support  for  America’s  participation  in  the  war. The  CPI  was  a
national propaganda machine that helped create a political cli-
mate intolerant of dissent. (p. 690)

Committee to Defend America By Aiding the Allies: A group of
interventionists  who  believed  in  engaging  with,  rather  than
withdrawing from, international developments. Interventionists
became increasingly vocal in 1940 as war escalated in Europe.
(p. 771)

committees  of  correspondence:  A  communications  network
established  among  towns  in  the  colonies,  and  among  colonial
assemblies, between 1772 and 1773 to provide for rapid dissem-
ination of news about important political developments. (p. 168)

Commonwealth System: The republican system of political econ-
omy created by state governments by 1820, whereby states fun-
neled  aid  to  private  businesses  whose  projects  would  improve
the general welfare. (p. 256)

companionate marriage: A marriage based on the republican val-
ues of equality and mutual respect. Although husbands in these
marriages  retained  significant  legal  power,  they  increasingly
came to see their wives as loving partners rather than as inferiors
or dependents. (p. 258)

competency: The ability of a family to keep a household solvent and
independent and to pass that ability on to the next generation.
(p. 117)

Compromise  of  1850:  Laws  passed  in  1850  that  were  meant  to
resolve the dispute over the status of slavery in the territories.
Key elements included the admission of California as a free state
and the Fugitive Slave Act. (p. 429)

Comstock Act: An 1873 law that prohibited circulation of “obscene
literature,” defined as including most information on sex, repro-
duction, and birth control. (p. 585)

Comstock Lode: Immense silver ore deposit discovered in 1859 in
Nevada that touched off a mining rush, bringing a diverse popu-
lation into the region and leading to the establishment of boom-
towns. (p. 516)

Congress  of  Racial  Equality  (CORE):  Civil  rights  organization
founded in 1942 in Chicago by James Farmer and other mem-
bers  of  the  Fellowship  of  Reconciliation  (FOR)  that  espoused
nonviolent  direct  action.  In  1961  CORE  organized  a  series  of
what were called Freedom Rides on interstate bus lines through-
out  the  South  to  call  attention  to  blatant  violations  of  recent
Supreme  Court  rulings  against  segregation  in  interstate  com-
merce. (p. 870)

The Conscience of a Conservative: A 1960 book that set forth an
uncompromising  conservatism  and  inspired  a  Republican
grassroots movement in support of its author, Barry Goldwater.
(p. 975)

conscience  Whigs:  Whig  politicians  who  opposed  the  Mexican
War (1846–1848) on moral grounds, maintaining that the pur-
pose  of  the  war  was  to  expand  and  perpetuate  control  of  the
national government. (p. 421)

“consolidated  government”:  A  term  meaning  a  powerful  and

potentially oppressive national government. (p. 320)

constitutional monarchy: A monarchy limited in its rule by a con-

stitution. (p. 87)

consumer credit: New forms of borrowing, such as auto loans and
installment plans, that flourished in the 1920s but helped trigger
the Great Depression. (p. 725)

consumer  revolution:  An  increase  in  consumption  in  English
manufactures in Britain and the British colonies fueled by the
Industrial Revolution. Although the consumer revolution raised
living standards, it landed many consumers — and the colonies
as a whole — in debt. (p. 141)

containment: The basic U.S. policy of the Cold War, which sought
to contain communism within its existing geographic boundar-
ies. Initially, containment focused on the Soviet Union and East-
ern  Europe,  but  in  the  1950s  it  came  to  include  China,  North
Korea, and other parts of the developing world. (p. 808)

