Glossary

G-5

Continental Association: An association established in 1774 by the
First Continental Congress to enforce a boycott of British goods.
(p. 171)

mous profit. Organizers of the scheme protected it from investi-
gation  by  providing  gifts  of  its  stock  to  powerful  members  of
Congress. (p. 498)

Continental Congress: September 1774 gathering of colonial del-
egates  in  Philadelphia  to  discuss  the  crisis  precipitated  by  the
Coercive  Acts.  The  Congress  produced  a  declaration  of  rights
and an agreement to impose a limited boycott of trade with Brit-
ain. (p. 169)

“contrabands”: Slaves who fled plantations and sought protection

behind Union lines during the Civil War. (p. 463)

Contract  with  America:  Initiatives  by  Representative  Newt
Gingrich of Georgia for significant tax cuts, reductions in wel-
fare programs, anticrime measures, and cutbacks in federal reg-
ulations. (p. 1021)

Contras: An opposition group in Nicaragua that President Reagan
ordered the CIA to assist. While Congress banned the CIA and
all other government agencies from providing any military sup-
port  to  the  Contras,  a  lieutenant  colonel  in  the  U.S.  Marines,
Oliver  North,  used  the  profits  from  the  Iranian  arms  deal  to
assist the Contras, resulting in the Iran-Contra affair. (p. 992)

convict leasing: Notorious system, begun during Reconstruction,
whereby  southern  state  officials  allowed  private  companies  to
hire out prisoners to labor under brutal conditions in mines and
other industries. (p. 495)

corrupt bargain: A term used by Andrew Jackson’s supporters for
the  appointment  by  President  John  Quincy  Adams  of  Henry
Clay  as  his  secretary  of  state,  the  traditional  stepping-stone  to
the  presidency.  Clay  had  used  his  influence  as  Speaker  of  the
House  to  elect  Adams  rather  than  Jackson  in  the  election  in
1824. (p. 319)

counterculture: A culture embracing values or lifestyles opposing
those of the mainstream culture. Became synonymous with hip-
pies, people who opposed and rejected conventional standards
of society and advocated extreme liberalism in their sociopoliti-
cal attitudes and lifestyles. (p. 918)

Counter-Reformation: A reaction in the Catholic Church triggered
by the Reformation that sought change from within and created
new  monastic  and  missionary  orders,  including  the  Jesuits
(founded  in  1540),  who  saw  themselves  as  soldiers  of  Christ.
(p. 22)

Covenant Chain: The alliance of the Iroquois, first with the colony
of New York, then with the British Empire and its other colonies.
The Covenant Chain became a model for relations between the
British Empire and other Native American peoples. (p. 89)

covenant of grace: The Christian idea that God’s elect are granted
salvation as a pure gift of grace. This doctrine holds that nothing
people do can erase their sins or earn them a place in heaven.
(p. 62)

covenant  of  works:  The  Christian  idea  that  God’s  elect  must  do
good works in their earthly lives to earn their salvation. (p. 62)

Crédit Mobilier: A sham corporation set up by shareholders in the
Union Pacific Railroad to secure government grants at an enor-

Crime of 1873: A term used by those critical of an 1873 law direct-
ing the U.S. Treasury to cease minting silver dollars, retire Civil
War–era greenbacks, and replace them with notes backed by the
gold standard from an expanded system of national banks. (p. 515)

Crittenden  Compromise:  A  plan  proposed  by  Senator  John  J.
Crittenden  for  a  constitutional  amendment  to  protect  slavery
from  federal  interference  in  any  state  where  it  already  existed
and  for  the  westward  extension  of  the  Missouri  Compromise
line to the California border. (p. 446)

Crusades: A series of wars undertaken by Christian armies between
a.d.  1096  and  1291  to  reverse  the  Muslim  advance  in  Europe
and win back the holy lands where Christ had lived. (p. 22)

Cuban missile crisis: The 1962 nuclear standoff between the Soviet
Union  and  the  United  States  when  the  Soviets  attempted  to
deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba. (p. 831)

culture war: A term used by Patrick Buchanan in 1992 to describe
a long-standing political struggle, dating to the 1920s, between
religious traditionalists and secular liberals. Social issues such as
abortion rights and the rights of lesbians and gay men divided
these groups. (p. 1012)

currency  tax:  A  hidden  tax  on  the  farmers  and  artisans  who
accepted Continental bills in payment for supplies and on the
thousands of soldiers who took them as pay. Because of rampant
inflation, Continental currency lost much of its value during the
war; thus, the implicit tax on those who accepted it as payment.
(p. 196)

Dawes  Severalty  Act:  The  1887  law  that  gave  Native  Americans
severalty  (individual  ownership  of  land)  by  dividing  reserva-
tions into homesteads. The law was a disaster for native peoples,
resulting over several decades in the loss of 66 percent of lands
held by Indians at the time of the law’s passage. (p. 532)

D-Day:  June  6,  1944,  the  date  of  the  Allied  invasion  of  northern
France. D-Day was the largest amphibious assault in world his-
tory. The invasion opened a second front against the Germans
and moved the Allies closer to victory in Europe. (p. 790)

Declaration of Independence: A document containing philosoph-
ical principles and a list of grievances that declared separation
from Britain. Adopted by the Second Continental Congress on
July 4, 1776, it ended a period of intense debate with moderates
still hoping to reconcile with Britain. (p. 178)

Declaratory Act of 1766: Law issued by Parliament to assert Parlia-
ment’s unassailable right to legislate for its British colonies “in all
cases whatsoever,” putting Americans on notice that the simul-
taneous repeal of the Stamp Act changed nothing in the imperial
powers of Britain. (p. 160)

Defense of Marriage Act: A law enacted by Congress in 1998 that
allowed  states  to  refuse  to  recognize  gay  marriages  or  civil
unions formed in other jurisdictions. The Supreme Court ruled
that DOMA was unconstitutional in 2013. (p. 1020)

