G-6

Glossary

deindustrialization: The dismantling of manufacturing — especially
in  the  automobile,  steel,  and  consumer-goods  industries — in
the  decades  after  World  War  II,  representing  a  reversal  of  the
process  of  industrialization  that  had  dominated  the  American
economy from the 1870s through the 1940s. (p. 944)

deism: The Enlightenment-influenced belief that the Christian God
created the universe and then left it to run according to natural
laws. (p. 128)

demographic  transition:  The  sharp  decline  in  birthrate  in  the
United States beginning in the 1790s that was caused by changes
in  cultural  behavior,  including  the  use  of  birth  control.  The
migration of thousands of young men to the trans-Appalachian
west was also a factor in this decline. (p. 259)

deregulation: The limiting of regulation by federal agencies. Dereg-
ulation of prices in the trucking, airline, and railroad industries
had begun under President Carter in the late 1970s, and Reagan
expanded it to include cutting back on government protections
of consumers, workers, and the environment. (p. 950)

deskilling: The elimination of skilled labor under a new system of
mechanized  manufacturing,  in  which  workers  completed  dis-
crete,  small-scale  tasks  rather  than  crafting  an  entire  product.
With  deskilling,  employers  found  they  could  pay  workers  less
and replace them more easily. (p. 551)

détente: The easing of conflict between the United States and the
Soviet  Union  during  the  Nixon  administration,  which  was
achieved  by  focusing  on  issues  of  common  concern,  such  as
arms control and trade. (p. 929)

division of labor: A system of manufacture that divides production
into  a  series  of  distinct  and  repetitive  tasks  performed  by
machines or workers. (p. 286)

dollar  diplomacy:  Policy  emphasizing  the  connection  between
America’s  economic  and  political  interests  overseas.  Business
would  gain  from  diplomatic  efforts  in  its  behalf,  while  the
strengthened American economic presence overseas would give
added leverage to American diplomacy. (p. 711)

domestic  slavery:  A  term  referring  to  the  assertion  by  Elizabeth
Cady  Stanton  and  other  female  abolitionists  that  traditional
gender roles and legal restrictions created a form of slavery for
married women. (p. 370)

Dominion  of  New  England:  A  royal  province  created  by  King
James II in 1686 that would have absorbed Connecticut, Rhode
Island, Massachusetts Bay, Plymouth, New York, and New Jersey
into  a  single,  vast  colony  and  eliminated  their  assemblies  and
other chartered rights. James’s  plan was canceled by the Glori-
ous Revolution in 1688, which removed him from the throne.
(p. 85)

domino  theory:  President  Eisenhower’s  theory  of  containment,
which warned that the fall of a non-Communist government to
communism in Southeast Asia would trigger the spread of com-
munism to neighboring countries. (p. 828)

draft (conscription): The system for selecting individuals for con-
scription,  or  compulsory  military  service,  first  implemented
during the Civil War. (p. 452)

Dred  Scott  v.  Sandford:  The  1857  Supreme  Court  decision  that
ruled  the  Missouri  Compromise  unconstitutional.  The  Court
ruled against slave Dred Scott, who claimed that travels with his
master into free states and territories made him and his family
free. The decision also denied the federal government the right
to exclude slavery from the territories and declared that African
Americans were not citizens. (p. 433)

Dunmore’s War: A 1774 war led by Virginia’s royal governor, the
Earl of Dunmore, against the Ohio Shawnees, who had a long-
standing claim to Kentucky as a hunting ground. The Shawnees
were defeated and Dunmore and his militia forces claimed Ken-
tucky as their own. (p. 175)

dust bowl: A series of dust storms from 1930 to 1941 during which
a  severe  drought  afflicted  the  semiarid  states  of  Oklahoma,
Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, Arkansas, and Kansas. (p. 759)

Earth  Day:  An  annual  event  honoring  the  environment  that  was
first celebrated on April 22, 1970, when 20 million citizens gath-
ered in communities across the country to express their support
for a cleaner, healthier planet. (p. 939)

Economic Growth and Tax Relief Act: Legislation introduced by
President George W. Bush and passed by Congress in 2001 that
slashed income tax rates, extended the earned income credit for
the poor, and marked the estate tax to be phased out by 2010.
(p. 1026)

Economic  Opportunity  Act:  1964  act  which  created  a  series  of
programs,  including  Head  Start  to  prepare  disadvantaged
preschoolers  for  kindergarten  and  the  Job  Corps  and  Upward
Bound to provide young people with training and employment,
aimed at alleviating poverty and spurring economic growth in
impoverished areas. (p. 905)

Economic  Recovery  Tax  Act  (ERTA):  Legislation  introduced  by
President Reagan and passed by Congress in 1981 that autho-
rized  the  largest  reduction  in  taxes  in  the  nation’s  history.
(p. 983)

Eisenhower  Doctrine:  President  Eisenhower’s  1957  declaration
that the United States would actively combat communism in the
Middle East. (p. 829)

Emancipation Proclamation: President Abraham Lincoln’s procla-
mation issued on January 1, 1863, that legally abolished slavery
in all states that remained out of the Union. While the Emanci-
pation Proclamation did not immediately free a single slave, it
signaled an end to the institution of slavery. (p. 464)

Embargo Act of 1807: An act of Congress that prohibited U.S. ships
from traveling to foreign ports and effectively banned overseas
trade  in  an  attempt  to  deter  Britain  from  halting  U.S.  ships  at
sea. The embargo caused grave hardships for Americans engaged
in overseas commerce. (p. 234)

encomienda: A grant of Indian labor in Spanish America given in
the sixteenth century by the Spanish kings to prominent men.
Encomenderos extracted tribute from these Indians in exchange
for granting them protection and Christian instruction. (p. 234)

energy crisis: A period of fuel shortages in the United States after
the  Arab  states  in  the  Organization  of  Petroleum  Exporting

