Countries  (OPEC)  declared  an  oil  embargo  in  October  1973.
(p. 939)

Enforcement  Laws:  Acts  passed  in  Congress  in  1870  and  signed
by  President  U.  S.  Grant  that  were  designed  to  protect  freed-
men’s rights under the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments.
Authorizing  federal  prosecutions,  military  intervention,  and
martial law to suppress terrorist activity, the Enforcement Laws
largely succeeded in shutting down Klan activities. (p. 499)

English  common  law:  The  centuries-old  body  of  legal  rules  and
procedures that protected the lives and property of the British
monarch’s subjects. (p. 159)

Enlightenment:  An  eighteenth-century  philosophical  movement
that  emphasized  the  use  of  reason  to  reevaluate  previously
accepted  doctrines  and  traditions  and  the  power  of  reason  to
understand and shape the world. (p. 126)

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): Federal agency created
by  Congress  and  President  Nixon  in  1970  to  enforce  environ-
mental  laws,  conduct  environmental  research,  and  reduce
human health and environmental risks from pollutants. (p. 939)

environmentalism:  Activist  movement  begun  in  the  1960s  that
was  concerned  with  protecting  the  environment  through
activities such as conservation, pollution control measures, and
public  awareness  campaigns.  In  response  to  the  new  environ-
mental  consciousness,  the  federal  government  staked  out  a
broad role in environmental regulation in the 1960s and 1970s.
(p. 939)

Equal Pay Act (1963): Law that established the principle of equal
pay for equal work. Trade union women were especially critical
in pushing for, and winning, congressional passage of the law.
(p. 908)

Equal  Rights  Amendment  (ERA):  Constitutional  amendment
passed by Congress in 1972 that would require equal treatment
of  men  and  women  under  federal  and  state  law.  Facing  fierce
opposition from the New Right and the Republican Party, the
ERA was defeated as time ran out for state ratification in 1982.
(p. 952)

Erie  Canal:  A  364-mile  waterway  connecting  the  Hudson  River
and Lake Erie. The Erie Canal brought prosperity to the entire
Great Lakes region, and its benefits prompted civic and business
leaders in Philadelphia and Baltimore to propose canals to link
their cities to the Midwest. (p. 293)

established church: A church given privileged  legal  status by the
government. Historically, such established churches in Europe
and America were supported by public taxes and were often the
only legally permitted religious institutions. (p. 270)

Ethics  in  Government  Act:  Passed  in  the  wake  of  the  Watergate
scandal,  the  1978  act  forced  political  candidates  to  disclose
financial  contributions  and  limited  the  lobbying  activities  of
former elected officials. (p. 948)

ethnocultural  politics:  Refers  to  the  fact  that  the  political  alle-
giance of many American voters was determined less by party
policy than by their membership in a specific ethnic or religious
group. (p. 340)

Glossary

G-7

eugenics:  An  emerging  “science”  of  human  breeding  in  the  late
nineteenth  century  that  argued  that  mentally  deficient  people
should be prevented from reproducing. (p. 594)

evangelicalism:  The  trend  in  Protestant  Christianity  that  stresses
salvation through conversion, repentance of sin, and adherence
to  scripture;  it  also  stresses  the  importance  of  preaching  over
ritual. (p. 962)

Executive  Order  8802:  An  order  signed  by  President  Roosevelt
in  1941  that  prohibited  “discrimination  in  the  employment  of
workers  in  defense  industries  or  government  because  of  race,
creed, color, or national origin” and established the Fair Employ-
ment Practices Commission (FEPC). (p. 780)

Executive Order 9066: An order signed by President Roosevelt in
1941  that  authorized  the  War  Department  to  force  Japanese
Americans from their West Coast homes and hold them in relo-
cation camps for the rest of the war. (p. 787)

Exodusters:  African  Americans  who  walked  or  rode  out  of  the
Deep South following the Civil War, many settling on farms in
Kansas in hopes of finding peace and prosperity. (p. 520)

Fair  Deal:  The  domestic  policy  agenda  announced  by  President
Harry S. Truman in 1949. Including civil rights, health care, and
education reform, Truman’s initiative was only partially success-
ful in Congress. (p. 820)

family values: Values promoted by the Religious Right, including
support  for  the  traditional  nuclear  family  and  opposition  to
same-sex marriage and abortion. (p. 996)

Farmers’ Alliance: A rural movement founded in Texas during the
depression of the 1870s that spread across the plains states and
the South. The Farmers’ Alliance advocated cooperative stores
and exchanges that would circumvent middlemen, and it called
for greater government aid to farmers and stricter regulation of
railroads. (p. 568)

fascism: An authoritarian system of government characterized by
dictatorial rule, extreme nationalism, disdain for civil society, and
a conviction that imperialism and warfare are the principal means
by which nations attain greatness. The United States went to war
against fascism when it faced Nazi Germany under Adolf Hitler
and Italy under Benito Mussolini during World War II. (p. 768)

Federal  Housing  Administration:  An  agency  established  by  the
Federal  Housing  Act  of  1934  that  refinanced  home  mortgages
for mortgage holders facing possible foreclosure. (p. 744)

Federal Reserve Act: The central bank system of the United States,
created in 1913. The Federal Reserve helps set the money supply
level, thus influencing the rate of growth of the U.S. economy,
and  seeks  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  U.S.  monetary  system.
(p. 661)

Federalist  No.  10:  An  essay  by  James  Madison  in  The  Federalist
(1787–1788)  that  challenged  the  view  that  republican  govern-
ments only worked in small polities; it argued that a geographi-
cally  expansive  national  government  would  better  protect
republican liberty. (p. 210)

Federalists: Supporters of the Constitution of 1787, which created
a strong central government; their opponents, the Antifederalists,

