G-8

Glossary

feared  that  a  strong  central  government  would  corrupt  the
nation’s newly won liberty. (p. 207)

The Feminine Mystique: The title of an influential book written in
1963 by Betty Friedan critiquing the ideal whereby women were
encouraged to confine themselves to roles within the domestic
sphere. (p. 908)

feminism: The ideology that women should enter the public sphere
not only to work on behalf of others, but also for their own equal
rights and advancement. Feminists moved beyond advocacy of
women’s voting rights to seek greater autonomy in professional
careers, property rights, and personal relationships. (p. 592)

Fetterman massacre: A massacre in December 1866 in which 1,500
Sioux warriors lured Captain William Fetterman and 80 soldiers
from a Wyoming fort and attacked them. With the Fetterman
massacre the Sioux succeeded in closing the Bozeman Trail, the
main route into Montana. (p. 528)

Fifteenth Amendment: Constitutional amendment ratified in 1869
that forbade states to deny citizens the right to vote on grounds
of race, color, or “previous condition of servitude.” (p. 485)

“Fifty-four forty or fight!”: Democratic candidate Governor James
K. Polk’s slogan in the election of 1844 calling for American sov-
ereignty over the entire Oregon Country, stretching from Cali-
fornia  to  Russian-occupied  Alaska  and  presently  shared  with
Great Britain. (p. 418)

fireside chats: A series of informal radio addresses Franklin Roosevelt
made to the nation in which he explained New Deal initiatives.
(p. 740)

flapper:  A  young  woman  of  the  1920s  who  defied  conventional
standards of conduct by wearing short skirts and makeup, freely
spending the money she earned on the latest fashions, dancing
to jazz, and flaunting her liberated lifestyle. (p. 726)

forty-niners: The more than 80,000 settlers who arrived in Califor-

nia in 1849 as part of that territory’s gold rush. (p. 425)

Four  Freedoms:  Identified  by  President  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt  as
the  most  basic  human  rights:  freedom  of  speech,  freedom  of
religion, freedom from want, and freedom from fear. The presi-
dent used these ideas of freedom to justify support for England
during World War II, which in turn pulled the United States into
the war. (p. 771)

Four-Minute Men: Name given to thousands of volunteers enlisted
by the Committee on Public Information to deliver short prowar
speeches at movie theaters, as part of an effort to galvanize pub-
lic support for the war and suppress dissent. (p. 690)

Fourteen Points: Principles for a new world order proposed in 1919
by President Woodrow Wilson as a basis for peace negotiations at
Versailles.  Among  them  were  open  diplomacy,  freedom  of  the
seas, free trade, territorial integrity, arms reduction, national self-
determination, and creation of the League of Nations. (p. 696)

Fourteenth  Amendment:  Constitutional  amendment  ratified  in
1868 that made all native-born or naturalized persons U.S. citi-
zens and prohibited states from abridging the rights of national
citizens, thus giving primacy to national rather than state citi-
zenship. (p. 481)

franchise: The right to vote. Between 1820 and 1860, most states
revised their constitutions to extend the vote to all adult white
males. Black adult men gained the right to vote with the passage
of the Fourteenth Amendment (1868). The Nineteenth Amend-
ment (1920) granted adult women the right to vote. (p. 316)

free silver: A policy of loosening the money supply by expanding
federal coinage to include silver as well as gold. Advocates of the
policy  thought  it  would  encourage  borrowing  and  stimulate
industry,  but  the  defeat  of  Democratic  presidential  candidate
William Jennings Bryan ended the “free silver” movement and
gave Republicans power to retain the gold standard. (p. 645)

Freedmen’s  Bureau:  Government  organization  created  in  March
1865 to aid displaced blacks and other war refugees. Active until
the early 1870s, it was the first federal agency in history that pro-
vided  direct  payments  to  assist  those  in  poverty  and  to  foster
social welfare. (p. 481)

Freedman’s Savings and Trust Company: A private bank founded
in 1865 that had worked closely with the Freedmen’s Bureau and
Union  army  across  the  South.  In  June  1874,  when  the  bank
failed,  Congress  refused  to  compensate  its  61,000  depositors,
including many African Americans. (p. 497)

Freedom of Information Act: Passed in the wake of the Watergate
scandal, the 1974 act gave citizens access to federal records. (p. 948)

freeholds: Land owned in its entirety, without feudal dues or land-
lord  obligations.  Freeholders  had  the  legal  right  to  improve,
transfer, or sell their landed property. (p. 53)

Freeport Doctrine: The argument presented by Senator Stephen A.
Douglas that a territory’s residents could exclude slavery by not
adopting laws to protect it. (p. 438)

free-soil  movement:  A  political  movement  that  opposed  the
expansion  of  slavery.  In  1848  the  free-soilers  organized  the
Free-Soil Party, which depicted slavery as a threat to republican-
ism and to the Jeffersonian ideal of a freeholder society, argu-
ments  that  won  broad  support  among  aspiring  white  farmers.
(p. 421)

French Revolution: A 1789 revolution in France that was initially
welcomed  by  most  Americans  because  it  abolished  feudalism
and established a constitutional monarchy, but eventually came
to seem too radical to many. (p. 219)

fundamentalism:  A  term  adopted  by  Protestants,  between  the
1890s  and  the  1910s,  who  rejected  modernism  and  historical
interpretations of scripture and asserted the literal truth of the
Bible.  Fundamentalists  have  historically  seen  secularism  and
religious  relativism  as  markers  of  sin  that  will  be  punished  by
God. (p. 602)

Gadsden Purchase: A small slice of land (now part of Arizona and
New  Mexico)  purchased  by  President  Franklin  Pierce  in  1853
for the purpose of building a transcontinental rail line from New
Orleans to Los Angeles. (p. 431)

gag rule: A procedure in the House of Representatives from 1836 to
1844  by  which  antislavery  petitions  were  automatically  tabled
when they were received so that they could not become the sub-
ject of debate. (p. 365)

