gang-labor system: A system of work discipline used on southern
cotton plantations in the mid-nineteenth century in which white
overseers or black drivers supervised gangs of enslaved laborers
to achieve greater productivity. (p. 388)

gentility: A refined style of living and elaborate manners that came
to be highly prized among well-to-do English families after 1600
and strongly influenced leading colonists after 1700. (p. 102)

Ghost Dance movement: Religion of the late 1880s and early 1890s
that  combined  elements  of  Christianity  and  traditional  Native
American  religion.  It  fostered  Plains  Indians’  hope  that  they
could, through sacred dances, resurrect the great bison herds and
call up a storm to drive whites back across the Atlantic. (p. 534)

Gilded Age: A term invented in the 1920s describing the late nine-
teenth  century  as  a  period  of  ostentatious  displays  of  wealth,
growing poverty, and government inaction in the face of income
inequality. Commentators suggested that this era had been fol-
lowed  by  a  “Progressive  Era”  in  which  citizens  mobilized  for
reform.  The  chronological  line  between  the  “Gilded  Age”  and
the “Progressive Era” remains unclear, since the 1870s and 1880s
witnessed mass movements of farmers, industrial laborers, and
middle-class  women  for  reform.  Historians  generally  agree,
however,  that  the  era  after  1900  brought  about  more  laws  to
address industrial poverty, working conditions, and the power
of monopolies and trusts. (p. 638)

glasnost:  The  policy  introduced  by  Soviet  president  Mikhail
Gorbachev during the 1980s that involved greater openness and
freedom of expression and that contributed, unintentionally, to
the 1991 breakup of the Soviet Union. (p. 993)

Glass-Steagall  Act:  A  1933  law  that  created  the  Federal  Deposit
Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC),  which  insured  deposits  up  to
$2,500 (and now up to $250,000). The act also prohibited banks
from  making  risky,  unsecured  investments  with  customers’
deposits. (p. 740)

globalization:  The  spread  of  political,  cultural,  and  economic
influences  and  connections  among  countries,  businesses,  and
individuals around the world through trade, immigration, com-
munication, and other means. (p. 1004)

Glorious Revolution: A quick and nearly bloodless coup in 1688 in
which  James  II  of  England  was  overthrown  by  William  of
Orange.  Whig  politicians  forced  the  new  King  William  and
Queen Mary to accept the Declaration of Rights, creating a con-
stitutional monarchy that enhanced the powers of the House of
Commons at the expense of the crown. (p. 86)

gold standard: The practice of backing a country’s currency with its
reserves of gold. In 1873 the United States, following Great Brit-
ain and other European nations, began converting to the gold
standard. (p. 515)

Granger laws: Economic regulatory laws passed in some midwest-
ern states in the late 1870s, trigged by pressure from farmers and
the Greenback-Labor Party. (p. 566)

Great  Migration:  The  migration  of  over  400,000  African  Ameri-
cans from the rural South to the industrial cities of the North
during and after World War I. (p. 694)

Glossary

G-9

Great Railroad Strike of 1877: A nationwide strike of thousands of
railroad  workers  and  labor  allies,  who  protested  the  growing
power of railroad corporations and the steep wage cuts imposed
by  railroad  managers  amid  a  severe  economic  depression  that
had begun in 1873. (p. 565)

Great  Society:  President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson’s  domestic  program,
which  included  civil  rights  legislation,  antipoverty  programs,
government  subsidy  of  medical  care,  federal  aid  to  education,
consumer protection, and aid to the arts and humanities. (p. 904)

Greenback-Labor Party: A national political movement calling on
the government to increase the money supply in order to assist
borrowers  and  foster  economic  growth;  “Greenbackers”  also
called for greater regulation of corporations and laws enforcing
an eight-hour workday. (p. 565)

greenbacks:  Paper  money  issued by  the U.S.  Treasury  during the

Civil War to finance the war effort. (p. 460)

Group  of  Eight  (G8):  An  international  organization  of  the  lead-
ing capitalist industrial nations: the United States, Britain, Ger-
many, France, Italy, Japan, Canada, and Russia. The G8 largely
controlled  the  world’s  major  international  financial  organiza-
tions: the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF),
and  the  General  Agreement  on  Tariffs  and  Trade  (GATT).
(p. 1009)

guilds:  Organizations  of  skilled  workers  in  medieval  and  early
modern Europe that regulated the entry into, and the practice
of, a trade. (p. 20)

Gulf of Tonkin Resolution: Resolution passed by Congress in 1964
in  the  wake  of  a  naval  confrontation  in  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin
between the United States and North Vietnam. It gave the presi-
dent  virtually  unlimited  authority  in  conducting  the  Vietnam
War.  The  Senate  terminated  the  resolution  in  1971  following
outrage over the U.S. invasion of Cambodia. (p. 911)

habeas corpus: A legal writ forcing government authorities to jus-
tify their arrest and detention of an individual. During the Civil
War, Lincoln suspended habeas corpus to stop protests against
the draft and other anti-Union activities. (p. 454)

Haitian  Revolution:  The  1791  conflict  involving  diverse  Haitian
participants  and  armies  from  three  European  countries.  At  its
end, Haiti became a free, independent nation in which former
slaves were citizens. (p. 222)

“hard  war”:  The  philosophy  and  tactics  used  by  Union  general
William  Tecumseh  Sherman,  by  which  he  treated  civilians  as
combatants. (p. 470)

Harlem  Renaissance:  A  flourishing  of  African  American  artists,
writers, intellectuals, and social leaders in the 1920s, centered in
the neighborhoods of Harlem, New York City. (p. 718)

Haymarket Square: The May 4, 1886, conflict in Chicago in which
both workers and policemen were killed or wounded during a
labor demonstration called by local anarchists. The incident cre-
ated  a  backlash  against  all  labor  organizations,  including  the
Knights of Labor. (p. 568)

headright system: A system of land distribution, pioneered in Vir-
ginia  and  used  in  several  other  colonies,  that  granted  land —

