G-10

Glossary

usually  50  acres — to  anyone  who  paid  the  passage  of  a  new
arrival. By this means, large planters amassed huge landholdings
as they imported large numbers of servants and slaves. (p. 54)

heresy: A religious doctrine that is inconsistent with the teachings

of a church. (p. 22)

herrenvolk republic: A republic based on the principle of rule by a
master race. To preserve their privileged social position, south-
ern  leaders  restricted  individual  liberty  and  legal  equality  to
whites. (p. 266)

HIV/AIDS: A deadly disease that killed nearly a hundred thousand

people in the United States in the 1980s. (p. 985)

Hollywood: City in the Los Angeles area of California where, by the
1920s, nearly 90 percent of all films in the world were produced.
(p. 726)

Holocaust: Germany’s campaign during World War II to extermi-
nate all Jews living in German-controlled lands, along with other
groups the Nazis deemed “undesirable.” In all, some 11 million
people were killed in the Holocaust, most of them Jews. (p. 792)

Homestead Act: The 1862 act that gave 160 acres of free western
land to any applicant who occupied and improved the property.
This policy led to the rapid development of the American West
after the Civil War; facing arid conditions in the West, however,
many  homesteaders  found  themselves  unable  to  live  on  their
land. (p. 516)

Homestead  lockout:  The  1892  lockout  of  workers  at  the  Home-
stead, Pennsylvania, steel mill after Andrew Carnegie refused to
renew the union contract. Union supporters attacked the guards
hired to close them out and protect strikebreakers who had been
employed by the mill, but the National Guard soon suppressed
this resistance and Homestead, like other steel plants, became a
non-union mill. (p. 544)

horizontal  integration:  A  business  concept  invented  in  the  late
nineteenth century to pressure competitors and force rivals to
merge their companies into a conglomerate. John D. Rockefeller
of Standard Oil pioneered this business model. (p. 548)

hostage crisis: Crisis that began in 1979 after the deposed shah of
Iran  was  allowed  into  the  United  States  following  the  Iranian
revolution. Iranians broke into the U.S. embassy in Teheran and
took sixty-six Americans hostage. The hostage crisis lasted 444
days  and  contributed  to  President  Carter’s  reelection  defeat.
(p. 977)

House  of  Burgesses:  Organ  of  government  in  colonial  Virginia
made  up  of  an  assembly  of  representatives  elected  by  the
colony’s inhabitants. (p. 52)

House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC): Congressio-
nal committee especially prominent during the early years of the
Cold War that investigated Americans who might be disloyal to
the government or might have associated with communists or
other radicals. (p. 821)

household mode of production: The system of exchanging goods
and  labor  that  helped  eighteenth-century  New  England  free-
holders  survive  on  ever-shrinking  farms  as  available  land
became more scarce. (p. 120)

Hull House: One of the first and most famous social settlements,
founded  in  1889  by  Jane  Addams  and  her  companion  Ellen
Gates Starr in an impoverished, largely Italian immigrant neigh-
borhood on Chicago’s West Side. (p. 627)

Hundred Days: A legendary session during the first few months of
Franklin Roosevelt’s administration in which Congress enacted
fifteen  major  bills  that  focused  primarily  on  four  problems:
banking  failures,  agricultural  overproduction,  the  business
slump, and soaring unemployment. (p. 740)

Immigration and Nationality Act: A 1965 law that eliminated the
discriminatory  1924  nationality  quotas,  established  a  slightly
higher total limit on immigration, included provisions to ease
the entry of immigrants with skills in high demand, and allowed
immediate  family  members  of  legal  residents  in  the  United
States  to  be  admitted  outside  of  the  total  numerical  limit.
(p. 1013)

indentured servitude: Workers contracted for service for a speci-
fied  period.  In  exchange  for  agreeing  to  work  for  four  or  five
years (or more) without wages in the colonies, indentured work-
ers  received  passage  across  the  Atlantic,  room  and  board,  and
status as a free person at the end of the contract period. (p. 54)

Indian Removal Act of 1830: Act that directed the mandatory relo-
cation of eastern tribes to territory west of the Mississippi. Jack-
son  insisted  that  his  goal  was  to  save  the  Indians  and  their
culture.  Indians  resisted  the  controversial  act,  but  in  the  end
most were forced to comply. (p. 327)

Indian Reorganization Act: A 1934 law that reversed the Dawes
Act of 1887. Through the law, Indians won a greater degree of
religious freedom, and tribal governments regained their status
as semisovereign dependent nations. (p. 756)

individualism:  Word  coined  by  Alexis  de  Tocqueville  in  1835  to
describe Americans as people no longer bound by social attach-
ments to classes, castes, associations, and families. (p. 346)

Industrial Revolution: A burst of major inventions and economic
expansion  based  on  water  and  steam  power  and  the  use  of
machine technology that transformed certain industries, such as
cotton textiles and iron, between 1790 and 1860. (p. 286)

Industrial Workers of the World: An umbrella union and radical
political  group  founded  in  1905,  dedicated  to  organizing
unskilled  workers  to  oppose  capitalism.  Nicknamed  the  Wob-
blies, it advocated direct action by workers, including sabotage
and general strikes. (p. 655)

inland system: The slave trade system in the interior of the country

that fed slaves to the Cotton South. (p. 380)

Insular Cases: A set of Supreme Court rulings in 1901 that declared
that the U.S. Constitution did not automatically extend citizen-
ship  to  people  in  acquired  territories;  only  Congress  could
decide whether to grant citizenship. (p. 678)

internal  improvements:  Public  works  such  as  roads  and  canals.

(p. 319)

International Monetary Fund (IMF): A fund established to stabi-
lize currencies and provide a predictable monetary environment
for trade, with the U.S. dollar serving as the benchmark. (p. 840)

