Interstate Commerce Act: An 1887 act that created the Interstate
Commerce  Commission  (ICC),  a  federal  regulatory  agency
designed to oversee the railroad industry and prevent collusion
and unfair rates. (p. 569)

Iran-Contra  affair:  Reagan  administration  scandal  that  involved
the sale of arms to Iran in exchange for its efforts to secure the
release of hostages held in Lebanon and the redirection — illegal
because  banned  by  American  law — of  the  proceeds  of  those
sales to the Nicaraguan Contras. (p. 993)

Islam:  A  religion  that  considers  Muhammad  to  be  God’s  last
prophet.  Following  the  death  of  Muhammad  in  a.d.  632,  the
newly converted Arab peoples of North Africa used force and
fervor to spread the Muslim faith into sub-Saharan Africa, India,
Indonesia, Spain, and the Balkan regions of Europe. (p. 22)

Jacobins: A political faction in the French Revolution. Many Amer-
icans embraced the democratic ideology of the radical Jacobins
and, like them, formed political clubs and began to address one
another as “citizen.” (p. 219)

Jay’s Treaty: A 1795 treaty between the United States and Britain,
negotiated by John Jay. The treaty accepted Britain’s right to stop
neutral ships. In return, it allowed Americans to submit claims for
illegal seizures and required the British to remove their troops
and Indian agents from the Northwest Territory. (p. 222)

jazz:  Unique  American  musical  form,  developed  in  New  Orleans
and other parts of the South before World War I. Jazz musicians
developed an ensemble improvisational style. (p. 718)

Jim Crow: System of racial segregation in the South that lasted a

century, from after the Civil War until the 1960s. (p. 870)

joint-stock  corporation:  A  financial  organization  devised  by
English merchants around 1550 that facilitated the colonization
of  North  America.  In  these  companies,  a  number  of  investors
pooled  their  capital  and  received  shares  of  stock  in  the  enter-
prise in proportion to their share of the total investment. (p. 62)

Judiciary Act of 1789: Act that established a federal district court
in each state and three circuit courts to hear appeals from the
districts, with the Supreme Court having the final say. (p. 216)

Kansas-Nebraska Act: A controversial 1854 law that divided Indian
Territory  into  Kansas  and  Nebraska,  repealed  the  Missouri
Compromise, and left the new territories to decide the issue of
slavery on the basis of popular sovereignty. (p. 432)

Glossary

G-11

that those governments would recognize the South as an inde-
pendent nation and supply it with loans and arms. (p. 456)

kitchen debate: A 1959 debate over the merits of their rival systems
between U.S. vice president Richard Nixon and Soviet premier
Nikita Khrushchev at the opening of an American exhibition in
Moscow. (p. 838)

Knights of Labor: The first mass labor organization created among
America’s  working  class.  Founded  in  1869  and  peaking  in
strength  in  the  mid-1880s,  the  Knights  of  Labor  attempted  to
bridge boundaries of ethnicity, gender, ideology, race, and occu-
pation to build a “universal brotherhood” of all workers. (p. 567)

Ku Klux Klan: Secret society that first undertook violence against
African  Americans  in  the  South  after  the  Civil  War  but  was
reborn in 1915 to fight the perceived threats posed by African
Americans, immigrants, radicals, feminists, Catholics, and Jews.
(p. 499)

labor theory of value: The belief that human labor produces eco-
nomic  value.  Adherents  argued  that  the  price  of  a  product
should be determined not by the market (supply and demand)
but by the amount of work required to make it, and that most of
the price should be paid to the person who produced it. (p. 292)

laissez  faire:  French  for  “let  do”  or  “leave  alone.”  A  doctrine
espoused by classical liberals that the less the government does,
the better, particularly in reference to the economy. (p. 498)

land  banks:  An  institution,  established  by  a  colonial  legislature,
that printed paper money and lent it to farmers, taking a lien on
their land to ensure repayment. (p. 107)

land-grant colleges: Public universities founded to broaden educa-
tional opportunities and foster technical and scientific expertise.
These universities were funded by the Morrill Act, which autho-
rized the sale of federal lands to raise money for higher educa-
tion. (p. 516)

Lawrence  v.  Texas:  A  2003  landmark  decision  by  the  Supreme
Court that limited the power of states to prohibit private homo-
sexual activity between consenting adults. (p. 1020)

League  of  Nations:  The  international  organization  bringing
together  world  governments  to  prevent  future  hostilities,  pro-
posed by President Woodrow Wilson in the aftermath of World
War  I.  Although  the  League  of  Nations  did  form,  the  United
States never became a member state. (p. 697)

Kerner  Commission:  Informal  name  for  the  National  Advisory
Commission  on  Civil  Disorders,  formed  by  the  president  to
investigate  the  causes  of  the  1967  urban  riots.  Its  1968  report
warned  that  “our  nation  is  moving  toward  two  societies,  one
black, one white, separate and unequal.” (p. 863)

Lend-Lease Act: Legislation in 1941 that enabled Britain to obtain
arms from the United States without cash but with the promise
to  reimburse  the  United  States  when  the  war  ended.  The  act
reflected Roosevelt’s desire to assist the British in any way pos-
sible, short of war. (p. 771)

Keynesian economics: The theory, developed by British economist
John Maynard Keynes in the 1930s, that purposeful government
intervention in the economy (through lowering or raising taxes,
interest rates, and government spending) can affect the level of
overall  economic  activity  and  thereby  prevent  severe  depres-
sions and runaway inflation. (p. 751)

King Cotton: The Confederate belief during the Civil War that their
cotton  was  so  important  to  the  British  and  French  economies

liberal arts: A form of education pioneered by President Charles W.
Eliot  at  Harvard  University,  whereby  students  chose  from  a
range of electives, shaping their own curricula as they developed
skills in research, critical thinking, and leadership. (p. 587)

Liberty League: A group of Republican business leaders and con-
servative  Democrats  who  banded  together  to  fight  what  they
called the “reckless spending” and “socialist” reforms of the New
Deal. (p. 746)

