G-12

Glossary

Lochner v. New York: A 1905 Supreme Court ruling that New York
State could not limit bakers’ workday to ten hours because that
violated bakers’ rights to make contracts. (p. 649)

Lodge Bill: Also known as the Federal Elections Bill of 1890, a bill
proposing  that  whenever  100  citizens  in  any  district  appealed
for intervention, a bipartisan federal board could investigate and
seat the rightful winner. The defeat of the bill was a blow to those
seeking to defend African American voting rights and to ensure
full participation in politics. (p. 642)

Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock: A 1903 Supreme Court ruling that Con-
gress could make whatever Indian policies it chose, ignoring all
existing treaties. (p. 532)

Long Drive: Facilitated by the completion of the Missouri Pacific
Railroad in 1865, a system by which cowboys herded cattle hun-
dreds  of  miles  north  from  Texas  to  Dodge  City  and  the  other
cow towns of Kansas. (p. 519)

Lost  Generation:  The  phrase  coined  by  writer  Gertrude  Stein  to
refer  to  young  artists  and  writers  who  had  suffered  through
World  War  I  and  felt  alienated  from  America’s  mass-culture
society in the 1920s. (p. 720)

Louisiana Purchase: The 1803 purchase of French territory west of
the Mississippi River that stretched from the Gulf of Mexico to
Canada. The Louisiana Purchase nearly doubled the size of the
United States and opened the way for future American expan-
sion west. The purchase required President Thomas Jefferson to
exercise powers not explicitly granted to him by the Constitu-
tion. (p. 233)

Loyalty-Security  Program:  A  program  created  in  1947  by  Presi-
dent Truman that permitted officials to investigate any employee
of the federal government for “subversive” activities. (p. 821)

machine tools: Cutting, boring, and drilling machines used to pro-
duce standardized metal parts, which were then assembled into
products such as textile looms and sewing machines. The rapid
development  of  machine  tools  by  American  inventors  in  the
early  nineteenth  century  was  a  factor  in  the  rapid  spread  of
industrialization. (p. 290)

management  revolution:  An  internal  management  structure
adopted by many large, complex corporations that distinguished
top executives from those responsible for day-to-day operations
and departmentalized operations by function. (p. 546)

Manhattan  Project:  Top-secret  project  authorized  by  Franklin
Roosevelt in 1942 to develop an atomic bomb ahead of the Ger-
mans. The Americans who worked on the project at Los Alamos,
New  Mexico  (among  other  highly  secretive  sites  around  the
country), succeeded in producing a successful atomic bomb by
July 1945. (p. 793)

Manifest Destiny: A term coined by John L. O’Sullivan in 1845 to
express  the  idea  that  Euro-Americans  were  fated  by  God  to
settle  the  North  American  continent  from  the  Atlantic  to  the
Pacific Ocean. (p. 412)

manumission:  The  legal  act  of  relinquishing  property  rights  in
slaves. Worried that a large free black population would threaten
the  institution  of  slavery,  the  Virginia  assembly  repealed  Vir-
ginia’s 1782 manumission law in 1792. (p. 265)

Marbury  v.  Madison  (1803):  A  Supreme  Court  case  that  estab-
lished the principle of judicial review in finding that parts of the
Judiciary Act of 1789 were in conflict with the Constitution. For
the  first  time,  the  Supreme  Court  assumed  legal  authority  to
overrule acts of other branches of the government. (p. 231)

March on Washington: Officially named the March on Washington
for Jobs and Freedom, on August 28, 1963, a quarter of a million
people marched to the Lincoln Memorial to demand that Con-
gress  end  Jim  Crow  racial  discrimination  and  launch  a  major
jobs program to bring needed employment to black communi-
ties. (p. 886)

March  to  the  Sea:  Military  campaign  from  September  through
December 1864 in which Union forces under General Sherman
marched from Atlanta, Georgia, to the coast at Savannah. Carv-
ing  a  path  of  destruction  as  it  progressed,  Sherman’s  army
aimed at destroying white southerners’ will to continue the war.
(p. 470)

Market Revolution: The dramatic increase between 1820 and 1850
in  the  exchange  of  goods  and  services  in  market  transactions.
The Market Revolution reflected the increased output of farms
and factories, the entrepreneurial activities of traders and mer-
chants,  and  the  creation  of  a  transportation  network  of  roads,
canals, and railroads. (p. 293)

married women’s property laws: Laws enacted between 1839 and
1860  in  New  York  and  other  states  that  permitted  married
women to own, inherit, and bequeath property. (p. 371)

Marshall Plan: Aid program begun in 1948 to help European econ-

omies recover from World War II. (p. 809)

mass production: A phrase coined by Henry Ford, who helped to
invent a system of mass production of goods based on assembly
of standardized parts. This system accompanied the continued
deskilling of industrial labor. (p. 551)

maternalism: The belief that women should contribute to civic and
political life through their special talents as mothers, Christians,
and moral guides. Maternalists put this ideology into action by
creating dozens of social reform organizations. (p. 589)

matriarchy:  A  gendered  power  structure  in  which  social  identity

and property descend through the female line. (p. 15)

McCulloch v. Maryland (1819): A Supreme Court case that asserted

the dominance of national over state statutes. (p. 241)

mechanics: A term used in the nineteenth century to refer to skilled
craftsmen  and  inventors  who  built  and  improved  machinery
and machine tools for industry. (p. 287)

Medicaid: A health plan for the poor passed in 1965 and paid for by
general tax revenues and administered by the states. (p. 906)

Medicare: A health plan for the elderly passed in 1965 and funded

by a surcharge on Social Security payroll taxes. (p. 906)

mercantilism: A system of political economy based on government
regulation. Beginning in 1650, Britain enacted Navigation Acts
that  controlled  colonial  commerce  and  manufacturing  for  the
enrichment of Britain. (p. 45)

middle class: An economic group of prosperous farmers, artisans,
and traders that emerged in the early nineteenth century. Its rise
reflected a dramatic increase in prosperity. This surge in income,

