G-14

Glossary

mutual aid society: An urban aid society that served members of
an  ethnic  immigrant  group,  usually  those  from  a  particular
province  or  town.  The  societies  functioned  as  fraternal  clubs
that  collected  dues  from  members  in  order  to  pay  support  in
case of death or disability. (p. 612)

My Lai: The 1968 execution by U.S. Army troops of nearly five hun-
dred people in the South Vietnamese village of My Lai, includ-
ing a large number of women and children. (p. 928)

Nation  of  Islam:  A  religion  founded  in  the  United  States  that
became  a  leading  source  of  black  nationalist  thought  in  the
1960s. Black Muslims preached an apocalyptic brand of Islam,
anticipating the day when Allah would banish the white “devils”
and give the black nation justice. (p. 892)

National American Woman Suffrage Association: Women’s suf-
frage organization created in 1890 by the union of the National
Woman  Suffrage  Association  and  the  American  Woman  Suf-
frage Association. Up to national ratification of suffrage in 1920,
the NAWSA played a central role in campaigning for women’s
right to vote. (p. 592)

National  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Colored  People
(NAACP): An organization founded in 1910 by leading African
American  reformers  and  white  allies  as  a  vehicle  for  advocat-
ing equal rights for African Americans, especially through the
courts. (p. 655)

National  Association  of  Colored  Women:  An  organization  cre-
ated in 1896 by African American women to provide commu-
nity  support.  Through  its  local  clubs,  the  NACW  arranged
for  the  care  of  orphans,  founded  homes  for  the  elderly,  advo-
cated  temperance,  and  undertook  public  health  campaigns.
(p. 591)

National Association of Manufacturers: An association of indus-
trialists and business leaders opposed to government regulation.
In the era of the New Deal, the group promoted free enterprise
and capitalism through a publicity campaign of radio programs,
motion pictures, billboards, and direct mail. (p. 746)

National Audubon Society: Named in honor of antebellum natu-
ralist John James Audubon, a national organization formed in
1901  that  advocated  for  broader  government  protections  for
wildlife. (p. 583)

National  Child  Labor  Committee:  A  reform  organization  that
worked  (unsuccessfully)  to  win  a  federal  law  banning  child
labor. The NCLC hired photographer Lewis Hine to record bru-
tal conditions in mines and mills where thousands of children
worked. (p. 652)

National Consumers’ League: Begun in New York, a national pro-
gressive  organization  that  encouraged  women,  through  their
shopping  decisions,  to  support  fair  wages  and  working  condi-
tions for industrial laborers. (p. 629)

national debt: The cumulative total of all budget deficits. (p. 983)

National Defense Education Act: A 1958 act, passed in response
to  the  Soviet  launching  of  the  Sputnik  satellite,  that  funneled
millions of dollars into American universities, helping institu-
tions  such  as  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley  and  the

Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  among  others,  become
the leading research centers in the world. (p. 842)

National  Interstate  and  Defense  Highways  Act:  A  1956  law
authorizing  the  construction  of  a  national  highway  system.
(p. 857)

National Municipal League: A political reform organization that
advised cities to elect small councils and hire professional city
managers who would direct operations like a corporate execu-
tive. (p. 624)

National Organization for Women (NOW): Women’s civil rights
organization formed in 1966. Initially, NOW focused on elimi-
nating  gender  discrimination  in  public  institutions  and  the
workplace, but by the 1970s it also embraced many of the issues
raised by more radical feminists. (p. 909)

National  Origins  Act:  A  1924  law  limiting  annual  immigration
from each country to no more than 2 percent of that nationali-
ty’s  percentage  of  the  U.S.  population  as  it  had  stood  in  1890.
The law severely limited immigration, especially from Southern
and Eastern Europe. (p. 713)

National Park Service: A federal agency founded in 1916 that pro-
vided comprehensive oversight of the growing system of national
parks. (p. 583)

National Recovery Administration: Federal agency established in
June  1933  to  promote  industrial  recovery  during  the  Great
Depression.  It  encouraged  industrialists  to  voluntarily  adopt
codes that defined fair working conditions, set prices, and mini-
mized competition. (p. 741)

National Review: A conservative magazine founded by editor William
F. Buckley in 1955, who used it to criticize liberal policy. (p. 976)

National  Socialist  (Nazi)  Party:  German  political  party  led  by
Adolf Hitler, who became chancellor of Germany in 1933. The
party’s ascent was fueled by huge World War I reparation pay-
ments, economic depression, fear of communism, labor unrest,
and rising unemployment. (p. 768)

National War Labor Board: A federal agency founded in 1918 that
established an eight-hour day for war workers (with time-and-a-
half pay for overtime), endorsed equal pay for women, and sup-
ported workers’ right to organize. (p. 689)

National Woman Suffrage Association: A suffrage group headed
by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony that stressed
the need for women to lead organizations on their own behalf.
The NWSA focused exclusively on women’s rights — sometimes
denigrating men of color, in the process — and took up the battle
for a federal women’s suffrage amendment. (p. 486)

National  Woman’s  Party:  A  political  party  founded  in  1916  that
fought for an Equal Rights Amendment to the U.S. Constitution
in the early twentieth century. (p. 695)

nativist  movements:  Antiforeign  sentiment  in  the  United  States
that fueled anti-immigrant and immigration-restriction policies
against the Irish and Germans in the 1840s and the 1850s and
against other ethnic immigrants in subsequent decades. (p. 310)

natural rights: The rights to life, liberty, and property. According
to  the  English  philosopher  John  Locke  in  Two  Treatises  of

