Government (1690), political authority was not given by God to
monarchs. Instead, it derived from social compacts that people
made to preserve their natural rights. (p. 127)

natural  selection:  Charles  Darwin’s  theory  that  when  individual
members of a species are born with random genetic mutations
that better suit them for their environment — for example, cam-
ouflage  coloring  for  a  moth — these  characteristics,  since  they
are  genetically  transmissible,  become  dominant  in  future  gen-
erations. (p. 594)

naturalism: A literary movement that suggested that human beings
were not so much rational agents and shapers of their own des-
tinies as blind victims of forces beyond their control. (p. 594)

Naturalization,  Alien,  and  Sedition  Acts:  Three  laws  passed  in
1798 that limited individual rights and threatened the fledgling
party system. The Naturalization Act lengthened the residency
requirement for citizenship, the Alien Act authorized the depor-
tation of foreigners, and the Sedition Act prohibited the publica-
tion of insults or malicious attacks on the president or members
of Congress. (p. 224)

Navigation Acts: English laws passed, beginning in the 1650s and
1660s, requiring that certain English colonial goods be shipped
through  English  ports  on  English  ships  manned  primarily  by
English sailors in order to benefit English merchants, shippers,
and seamen. (p. 83)

Negro Leagues: All–African American professional baseball teams
where black men could showcase athletic ability and race pride.
The  leagues  thrived  until  the  desegregation  of  baseball  after
World War II. (p. 581)

neo-Europes: Term for colonies in which colonists sought to repli-
cate,  or  at  least  approximate,  economies  and  social  structures
they knew at home. (p. 40)

“neomercantilist”:  A  system  of  government-assisted  economic
development embraced by republican state legislatures through-
out the nation, especially in the Northeast. This system of activ-
ist  government  encouraged  private  entrepreneurs  to  seek
individual opportunity and the public welfare through market
exchange. (p. 250)

Neutrality Act of 1935: Legislation that sought to avoid entangle-
ment  in  foreign  wars  while  protecting  trade.  It  imposed  an
embargo on selling arms to warring countries and declared that
Americans traveling on the ships of belligerent nations did so at
their own risk. (p. 769)

New Jersey Plan: Alternative to the Virginia Plan drafted by delegates
from small states, retaining the confederation’s single-house con-
gress  with  one  vote  per  state.  It  shared  with  the  Virginia  Plan
enhanced congressional powers to raise revenue, control com-
merce, and make binding requisitions on the states. (p. 206)

New Left: A term applied to radical students of the 1960s and 1970s,
distinguishing their activism from the Old Left — the commu-
nists and socialists of the 1930s and 1940s who tended to focus on
economic and labor questions rather than cultural issues. (p. 914)

New  Lights:  Evangelical  preachers,  many  of  them  influenced  by
John  Wesley,  the  founder  of  English  Methodism,  and  George

Glossary

G-15

Whitefield, the charismatic itinerant preacher who brought his
message to Britain’s American colonies. They decried a  Chris-
tian  faith  that  was  merely  intellectual  and  emphasized  the
importance of a spiritual rebirth. (p. 132)

“New Look”: The defense policy of the Eisenhower administration
that  stepped  up  production  of  the  hydrogen  bomb  and  devel-
oped long-range bombing capabilities. (p. 826)

New Nationalism: In a 1910 speech, Theodore Roosevelt called for
a “New Nationalism” that promoted government intervention to
enhance public welfare, including a federal child labor law, more
recognition of labor rights, a national minimum wage for women,
women’s suffrage, and curbs on the power of federal courts to
stop reform. (p. 656)

Newlands  Reclamation  Act:  A  1902  law,  supported  by  President
Theodore Roosevelt, that allowed the federal government to sell
public lands to raise money for irrigation projects that expanded
agriculture on arid lands. (p. 651)

1968 Democratic National Convention: A 1968 convention held
in Chicago during which numerous antiwar demonstrators out-
side the convention hall were tear-gassed and clubbed by police.
Inside  the  convention  hall,  the  delegates  were  bitterly  divided
over Vietnam. (p. 921)

nonimportation movement: Colonists attempted nonimportation
agreements three times: in 1766, in response to the Stamp Act;
in 1768, in response to the Townshend duties; and in 1774, in
response  to  the  Coercive  Acts.  In  each  case,  colonial  radicals
pressured  merchants  to  stop  importing  British  goods.  In  1774
nonimportation was adopted by the First Continental Congress
and enforced by the Continental Association. American women
became crucial to the movement by reducing their households’
consumption of imported goods and producing large quantities
of homespun cloth. (p. 161)

North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA): A 1993 treaty
that eliminated all tariffs and trade barriers among the United
States, Canada, and Mexico. (p. 1010)

North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organization  (NATO):  Military  alliance
formed  in  1949  among  the  United  States,  Canada,  and  West-
ern  European  nations  to  counter  any  possible  Soviet  threat.
(p. 812)

Northwest Ordinance of 1787: A land act that provided for orderly
settlement and established a process by which settled territories
would  become  the  states  of  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois,  Michigan,
and Wisconsin. It also banned slavery in the Northwest Terri-
tory. (p. 201)

notables:  Northern  landlords,  slave-owning  planters,  and  seaport
merchants who dominated the political system of the early nine-
teenth century. (p. 316)

NSC-68: Top-secret government report of April 1950 warning that
national  survival  in  the  face  of  Soviet  communism  required  a
massive military buildup. (p. 813)

nullification:  The  constitutional  argument  advanced  by  John  C.
Calhoun that a state legislature or convention could void a law
passed by Congress. (p. 324)

