G-16

Glossary

Old  Lights:  Conservative  ministers  opposed  to  the  passion  dis-
played by evangelical preachers; they preferred to emphasize the
importance of cultivating a virtuous Christian life. (p. 132)

Omaha Platform: An 1892 statement by the Populists calling for
stronger government to protect ordinary Americans. (p. 643)

Patient  Protection  and  Affordable  Care  Act:  Sweeping  2010
health-care  reform  bill  championed  by  President  Obama  that
established nearly universal health insurance by providing sub-
sidies  and  compelling  larger  businesses  to  offer  coverage  to
employees. (p. 1031)

open door policy: A claim put forth by U.S. Secretary of State John
Hay that all nations seeking to do business in China should have
equal trade access. (p. 679)

patriarchy:  A  gendered  power  structure  in  which  social  identity
and property descend through the male line and male heads of
family rule over women and children. (p. 18)

Operation  Rescue:  A  movement  founded  by  religious  activist
Randall  Terry  in  1987  that  mounted  protests  outside  abortion
clinics and harassed their staffs and clients. (p. 1019)

patronage: The power of elected officials to grant government jobs
and  favors  to  their  supporters;  also  the  jobs  and  favors  them-
selves. (p. 106)

Operation Rolling Thunder: Massive bombing campaign against
North Vietnam authorized by President Johnson in 1965; against
expectations, it ended up hardening the will of the North Viet-
namese to continue fighting. (p. 911)

Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC): A car-
tel formed in 1960 by the Persian Gulf states and other oil-rich
developing countries that allowed its members to exert greater
control over the price of oil. (p. 938)

Ostend  Manifesto:  An  1854  manifesto  that  urged  President
Franklin Pierce to seize the slave-owning province of Cuba from
Spain.  Northern  Democrats  denounced  this  aggressive  initia-
tive, and the plan was scuttled. (p. 431)

The Other America: A 1962 book by left-wing social critic Michael
Harrington,  chronicling  “the  economic  underworld  of  Ameri-
can life.” His study made it clear that in economic terms the bot-
tom class remained far behind. (p. 843)

outwork: A system of manufacturing, also known as putting out,
used extensively in the English woolen industry in the sixteenth
and  seventeenth  centuries.  Merchants  bought  wool  and  then
hired landless peasants who lived in small cottages to spin and
weave it into cloth, which the merchants would sell in English
and foreign markets. (p. 45)

Palmer raids: A series of raids led by Attorney General A. Mitchell
Palmer  on  radical  organizations  that  peaked  in  January  1920,
when  federal  agents  arrested  six  thousand  citizens  and  aliens
and denied them access to legal counsel. (p. 709)

pan-Africanism:  The  idea  that  people  of  African  descent,  in  all
parts  of  the  world,  have  a  common  heritage  and  destiny  and
should cooperate in political action. (p. 720)

Panama Canal: A canal across the Isthmus of Panama connecting
trade between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Built by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers and opened in 1914, the canal gave
U.S. naval vessels quick access to the Pacific and provided the
United  States  with  a  commanding  position  in  the  Western
Hemisphere. (p. 682)

Panic  of  1819:  First  major  economic  crisis  of  the  United  States.
Farmers and planters faced an abrupt 30 percent drop in world
agricultural prices, and as farmers’ income declined, they could
not  pay  debts  owed  to  stores  and  banks,  many  of  which  went
bankrupt. (p. 251)

Panic of 1837: Second major economic crisis of the United States,

which led to hard times from 1837 to 1843. (p. 334)

Peace  Corps:  Program  launched  by  President  Kennedy  in  1961
through which young American volunteers helped with educa-
tion, health, and other projects in developing countries around
the world. (p. 832)

Pearl  Harbor:  A  naval  base  in  Pearl  Harbor,  Hawaii,  that  was
attacked by Japanese bombers on December 7, 1941; more than
2,400  Americans  were  killed.  The  following  day,  President
Roosevelt asked Congress for a declaration of war against Japan.
(p. 773)

peasants:  The  traditional  term  for  farmworkers  in  Europe.  Some
peasants owned land, while others leased or rented small plots
from landlords. (p. 18)

Pendleton Act: An 1883 law establishing a nonpartisan Civil Ser-
vice Commission to fill federal jobs by examination. The Pen-
dleton Act dealt a major blow to the “spoils system” and sought
to ensure that government positions were filled by trained, pro-
fessional employees. (p. 638)

Pennsylvania constitution of 1776: A constitution that granted all
taxpaying  men  the  right  to  vote  and  hold  office  and  created  a
unicameral (one-house) legislature with complete power; there
was no governor to exercise a veto. Other provisions mandated
a  system  of  elementary  education  and  protected  citizens  from
imprisonment for debt. (p. 198)

perestroika:  The  economic  restructuring  policy  introduced  by
Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev during the 1980s that con-
tributed,  unintentionally,  to  the  1991  breakup  of  the  Soviet
Union. (p. 993)

perfectionism:  Christian  movement  of  the  1830s  that  believed
people  could  achieve  moral  perfection  in  their  earthly  lives
because  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ  had  already  occurred.
(p. 352)

Persian Gulf War: The 1991 war between Iraq and a U.S.-led inter-
national coalition that was sparked by the 1990 Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait. A forty-day bombing campaign against Iraq followed by
coalition troops storming into Kuwait brought a quick coalition
victory. (p. 998)

Personal  Responsibility  and  Work  Opportunity  Reconciliation
Act:  Legislation  signed  by  President  Clinton  in  1996  that
replaced  Aid  to  Families  with  Dependent  Children,  the  major
welfare  program  dating  to  the  New  Deal  era,  with  Temporary
Assistance  for  Needy  Families,  which  provided  grants  to  the
states to assist the poor and which limited welfare payments to
two years, with a lifetime maximum of five years. (p. 1022)

