personal-liberty laws: Laws enacted in many northern states that
guaranteed to all residents, including alleged fugitives, the right
to a jury trial. (p. 431)

Philipsburg Proclamation: A 1779 proclamation that declared that
any slave who deserted a rebel master would receive protection,
freedom, and land from Great Britain. (p. 190)

Pietism: A Christian revival moment characterized by Bible study,
the  conversion  experience,  and  the  individual’s  personal  rela-
tionship with God. It began as an effort to reform the German
Lutheran Church in the mid-seventeenth century and became
widely  influential  in  Britain  and  its  colonies  in  the  eighteenth
century. (p. 126)

Pilgrims: One of the first Protestant groups to come to America,
seeking a separation from the Church of England. They founded
Plymouth, the first permanent community in New England, in
1620. (p. 60)

Planned  Parenthood  of  Southeastern  Pennsylvania  v.  Casey:  A
1992 Supreme Court case that upheld a law requiring a twenty-
four-hour  waiting  period  prior  to  an  abortion.  Although  the
decision upheld certain restrictions on abortions, it affirmed the
“essential holding” in Roe v. Wade (1973) that women had a con-
stitutional right to control their reproduction. (p. 1020)

Platt Amendment: A 1902 amendment to the Cuban constitution
that blocked Cuba from making a treaty with any country except
the United States and gave the United States the right to inter-
vene in Cuban affairs. The amendment was a condition for U.S.
withdrawal from the newly independent island. (p. 678)

Plessy  v.  Ferguson:  An  1896  Supreme  Court  case  that  ruled  that
racially  segregated  railroad  cars  and  other  public  facilities,  if
they claimed to be “separate but equal,” were permissible accord-
ing to the Fourteenth Amendment. (p. 577)

political machine: A complex, hierarchical party organization such
as  New  York’s  Tammany  Hall,  whose  candidates  remained  in
office  on  the  strength  of  their  political  organization  and  their
personal relationship with voters, especially working-class immi-
grants who had little alternative access to political power. (p. 619)

political machine: A highly organized group of insiders that directs
a political party. As the power of notables waned in the 1820s,
disciplined  political  parties  usually  run  by  professional  politi-
cians appeared in a number of states. (p. 317)

Popular Front: A small but vocal group of Americans who pushed
for greater U.S. involvement in Europe. American Communist
Party  members,  African  American  civil  rights  activists,  and
trade  unionists,  among  other  members  of  the  Popular  Front
coalition, encouraged Roosevelt to take a stronger stand against
European fascism. (p. 770)

popular sovereignty: The principle that ultimate power lies in the

hands of the electorate. (p. 179)

Port Huron Statement: A 1962 manifesto by Students for a Demo-
cratic Society from its first national convention in Port Huron,
Michigan, expressing students’ disillusionment with the nation’s
consumer culture and the gulf between rich and poor, as well as
a rejection of Cold War foreign policy, including the war in Viet-
nam. (p. 914)

Glossary

G-17

“positive  good”  argument:  An  argument  in  the  1830s  that  the
institution of slavery was a “positive good” because it subsidized
an elegant lifestyle for the white elite and provided tutelage for
genetically inferior Africans. (p. 386)

Potsdam Conference: The July 1945 conference in which Ameri-
can officials convinced the Soviet Union leader Joseph Stalin to
accept  German  reparations  only  from  the  Soviet  zone,  or  far
eastern part of Germany. The agreement paved the way for the
division of Germany into East and West. (p. 807)

predestination: The  Protestant  Christian  belief  that  God  chooses
certain  people  for  salvation  before  they  are  born.  Sixteenth-
century theologian John Calvin was the main proponent of this
doctrine, which became a fundamental tenet of Puritan theol-
ogy. (p. 22)

Presidential Commission on the Status of Women: Commission
appointed by President Kennedy in 1961, which issued a 1963
report documenting job and educational discrimination. (p. 909)

primogeniture: The practice of passing family land, by will or by

custom, to the eldest son. (p. 18)

Proclamation  of  Neutrality:  A  proclamation  issued  by  President
George Washington in 1793, allowing U.S. citizens to trade with
all  belligerents  in  the  war  between  France  and  Great  Britain.
(p. 219)

producerism: The argument that real economic wealth is created by
workers who make their living by physical labor, such as farmers
and craftsmen, and that merchants, lawyers, bankers, and other
middlemen  unfairly  gain  their  wealth  from  such  “producers.”
(p. 566)

progressivism:  A  loose  term  for  political  reformers — especially
those  from  the  elite  and  middle  classes — who  worked  to
improve  the  political  system,  fight  poverty,  conserve  environ-
mental resources, and increase government involvement in the
economy.  Giving  their  name  to  the  “Progressive  Era,”  such
reformers were often prompted to act by fear that mass, radical
protests by workers and farmers would spread, as well as by their
desire to enhance social welfare and social justice. (p. 624)

prohibition: The ban on the manufacture and sale of alcohol that
went  into  effect  in  January  1920  with  the  Eighteenth  Amend-
ment. Prohibition was repealed in 1933. (p. 712)

Proposition 13: A measure passed overwhelmingly by Californians
to roll back property taxes, cap future increases for present own-
ers, and require that all tax measures have a two-thirds majority
in the legislature. Proposition 13 inspired “tax revolts” across the
country and helped conservatives define an enduring issue: low
taxes. (p. 947)

Proposition  209:  A  proposition  approved  by  California  voters  in
1996 that outlawed affirmative action in state employment and
public education. (p. 1015)

proprietorship: A colony created through a grant of land from the
English monarch to an individual or group, who then set up a
form  of  government  largely  independent  from  royal  control.
(p. 82)

protective tariff: A tax or duty on foreign producers of goods com-
ing  into  or  imported  into  the  United  States;  tariffs  gave  U.S.

