G-18

Glossary

manufacturers  a  competitive  advantage  in  America’s  gigantic
domestic market. (p. 510)

dissatisfied with the direction of liberalism in the 1970s and left
the Democratic Party for the Republicans. (p. 982)

Protestant Reformation: The reform movement that began in 1517
with  Martin  Luther’s  critiques  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church
and  that  precipitated  an  enduring  schism  that  divided  Protes-
tants from Catholics. (p. 22)

Public Works Administration: A New Deal construction program
established by Congress in 1933. Designed to put people back to
work, the PWA built the Boulder Dam (renamed Hoover Dam)
and Grand Coulee Dam, among other large public works proj-
ects. (p. 741)

Pure Food and Drug Act: A 1906 law regulating the conditions in
the food and drug industries to ensure a safe supply of food and
medicine. (p. 629)

Puritans:  Dissenters  from  the  Church  of  England  who  wanted  a
genuine Reformation rather than the partial Reformation sought
by  Henry  VIII.  The  Puritans’  religious  principles  emphasized
the importance of an individual’s  relationship with God devel-
oped through Bible study, prayer, and introspection. (p. 61)

Quakers: Epithet for members of the Society of Friends. Their belief
that  God  spoke  directly  to  each  individual  through  an  “inner
light” and that neither ministers nor the Bible was essential to
discovering  God’s  Word  put  them  in  conflict  with  both  the
Church of England and orthodox Puritans. (p. 82)

Quartering Act of 1765: A British law passed by Parliament at the
request  of  General  Thomas  Gage,  the  British  military  com-
mander in America, that required colonial governments to pro-
vide barracks and food for British troops. (p. 157)

realism: A movement that called for writers and artists to picture

daily life as precisely and truly as possible. (p. 594)

recall: A pioneering progressive idea, enacted in Wisconsin, Ore-
gon,  California,  and  other  states,  that  gave  citizens  the  right
to  remove  unpopular  politicians  from  office  through  a  vote.
(p. 652)

reconquista:  The  campaign  by  Spanish  Catholics  to  drive  North
African  Moors  (Muslim  Arabs)  from  the  European  mainland.
After a centuries-long effort to recover their lands, the Spaniards
defeated the Moors at Granada in 1492 and secured control of
all of Spain. (p. 31)

Reconstruction  Act  of  1867:  An  act  that  divided  the  conquered
South into five military districts, each under the command of a
U.S.  general.  To  reenter  the  Union,  former  Confederate  states
had  to  grant  the  vote  to  freedmen  and  deny  it  to  leading  ex-
Confederates. (p. 482)

Red  Scare:  A  term  for  anticommunist  hysteria  that  swept  the
United States, first after World War I, and led to a series of gov-
ernment raids on alleged subversives and a suppression of civil
liberties. (p. 708)

“Redemption”: A term used by southern Democrats for the over-
throw  of  elected  governments  that  ended  Reconstruction  in
many parts of the South. So-called Redeemers terrorized Repub-
licans,  especially  in  districts  with  large  proportions  of  black
voters,  and  killed  and  intimidated  their  opponents  to  regain
power. (p. 498)

race  riot:  A  term  for  an  attack  on  African  Americans  by  white
mobs,  triggered  by  political  conflicts,  street  altercations,  or
rumors of crime. In some cases, such “riots” were not spontane-
ous  but  planned  in  advance  by  a  group  of  leaders  seeking  to
enforce white supremacy. (p. 614)

redemptioner:  A  common  type  of  indentured  servant  in  the
Middle colonies in the eighteenth century. Unlike other inden-
tured  servants,  redemptioners  did  not  sign  a  contract  before
leaving Europe. Instead, they found employers after arriving in
America. (p. 124)

Radical Republicans: The members of the Republican Party who
were bitterly opposed to slavery and to southern slave owners since
the mid-1850s. With the Confiscation Act in 1861, Radical Repub-
licans began to use wartime legislation to destroy slavery. (p. 463)

ragtime:  A  form  of  music,  apparently  named  for  its  “ragged
rhythm,” that became wildly popular in the early twentieth cen-
tury among audiences of all classes and races and that ushered in
an urban dance craze. Ragtime was an important form of “cross-
over” music, borrowed from working-class African Americans
by enthusiasts who were white and middle class. (p. 617)

“rain follows the plow”: An unfounded theory that settlement of

the Great Plains caused an increase in rainfall. (p. 519)

referendum: The  process  of  voting  directly  on  a  proposed  policy
measure rather than leaving it in the hands of elected legislators;
a progressive reform. (p. 652)

Regulators:  Landowning  protestors  who  organized  in  North  and
South  Carolina  in  the  1760s  and  1770s  to  demand  that  the
eastern-controlled  government  provide  western  districts  with
more  courts,  fairer  taxation,  and  greater  representation  in  the
assembly. (p. 142)

Religious  Right:  Politically  active  religious  conservatives,  espe-
cially Catholics and evangelical Christians, who became partic-
ularly  vocal  in  the  1980s  against  feminism,  abortion,  and
homosexuality and who promoted “family values.” (p. 976)

Reagan  coalition:  A  coalition  supporting  Ronald  Reagan  that
included the traditional core of Republican Party voters, middle-
class suburbanites and migrants to the Sunbelt states, blue-collar
Catholics, and a large contingent of southern whites, an elector-
ally  key  group  of  former  Democrats  that  had  been  gradually
moving toward the Republican Party since 1964. (p. 981)

“Remember  the  Maine”:  After  the  U.S.  battle  cruiser  Maine
exploded  in  Havana  harbor,  the  New  York  Journal  rallied  its
readers to “Remember the Maine,” galvanizing popular support
for the U.S. war against Spain. Evidence of Spanish complicity in
the explosion was not found; the likely cause was later found to
have been internal to the ship. (p. 675)

Reagan Democrats: Blue-collar Catholics from industrialized mid-
western  states  such  as  Michigan,  Ohio,  and  Illinois  who  were

Renaissance:  A  cultural  transformation  in  the  arts  and  learning
that began in Italy in the fourteenth century and spread through

