Glossary

G-19

much  of  Europe.  Its  ideals  reshaped  art  and  architecture  and
gave rise to civic humanism. (p. 20)

Report  on  Manufactures:  A  proposal  by  treasury  secretary
Alexander Hamilton in 1791 calling for the federal government
to urge the expansion of American manufacturing while impos-
ing tariffs on foreign imports. (p. 218)

Report  on  the  Public  Credit:  Alexander  Hamilton’s  1790  report
recommending  that  the  federal  government  should  assume
all state debts and fund the national debt — that is, offer interest
on it rather than repaying it — at full value. Hamilton’s goal was
to make the new country creditworthy, not debt-free. (p. 216)

republic: A state without a monarch or prince that is governed by

representatives of the people. (p. 19)

republican aristocracy: The Old South gentry that built impressive
mansions, adopted the manners and values of the English landed
gentry,  and  feared  federal  government  interference  with  their
slave property. (p. 386)

republican motherhood: The idea that the primary political role of
American  women  was  to  instill  a  sense  of  patriotic  duty  and
republican virtue in their children and mold them into exem-
plary republican citizens. (p. 259)

Revenue Act (1942): An act that expanded the number of people
paying  income  taxes  from  3.9  million  to  42.6  million.  These
taxes on personal incomes and business profits paid half the cost
of World War II. (p. 775)

revival: A renewal of religious enthusiasm in a Christian congrega-
tion. In the eighteenth century, revivals were often inspired by
evangelical preachers who urged their listeners to experience a
rebirth. (p. 129)

rights liberalism: The conviction that individuals require govern-
ment protection from discrimination. This version of liberalism
was promoted by the civil rights and women’s movements and
focused on identities — such as race or gender — rather than the
general social welfare of New Deal liberalism. (p. 868)

royal colony: In the English system, a royal colony was chartered by
the crown. The colony’s governor was appointed by the crown
and served according to the instructions of the Board of Trade.
(p. 52)

Rural  Electrification  Administration:  An  agency  established  in
1935 to promote nonprofit farm cooperatives that offered loans
to farmers to install power lines. (p. 760)

Rust Belt: The once heavily industrialized regions of the Northeast
and Midwest that went into decline after deindustrialization. By
the 1970s and 1980s, these regions were full of abandoned plants
and distressed communities. (p. 944)

Sabbatarian movement: A movement to preserve the Sabbath as a
holy day. These reformers believed that declining observance by
Christians  of  the  Sabbath  (Sunday)  was  the  greatest  threat  to
religion in the United States. (p. 306)

salutary  neglect:  A  term  used  to  describe  British  colonial  policy
during  the  reigns  of  George  I  (r.  1714–1727)  and  George  II
(r. 1727–1760). By relaxing their supervision of internal colonial
affairs, royal bureaucrats inadvertently assisted the rise of self-
government in North America. (p. 106)

Sand Creek massacre: The November 29, 1864, massacre of more
than  a  hundred  peaceful  Cheyennes,  largely  women  and  chil-
dren, by John M. Chivington’s Colorado militia. (p. 527)

Sandinistas:  The  democratically  elected  group  in  Nicaragua  that
President Reagan accused of threatening U.S. business interests.
Reagan  attempted  to  overthrow  them  by  ordering  the  CIA  to
assist an armed opposition group called the Contras. (p. 992)

scalawags:  Southern  whites  who  supported  Republican  Recon-
struction  and  were  ridiculed  by  ex-Confederates  as  worthless
traitors. (p. 493)

scientific  management:  A  system  of  organizing  work  developed
by  Frederick  W.  Taylor  in  the  late  nineteenth  century.  It  was
designed to coax maximum output from the individual worker,
increase efficiency, and reduce production costs. (p. 552)

Roe v. Wade: The 1973 Supreme Court ruling that the Constitution
protects  the  right  to  abortion,  which  states  cannot  prohibit  in
the  early  stages  of  pregnancy.  The  decision  galvanized  social
conservatives and made abortion a controversial policy issue for
decades to come. (p. 956)

Scopes  trial:  The  1925  trial  of  John  Scopes,  a  biology  teacher  in
Dayton,  Tennessee,  for  violating  his  state’s  ban  on  teaching
evolution. The trial created a nationwide media frenzy and came
to  be  seen  as  a  showdown  between  urban  and  rural  values.
(p. 713)

Rome-Berlin Axis: A political and military alliance formed in 1936
between German dictator Adolf Hitler and the Italian dictator
Benito Mussolini. (p. 769)

Roosevelt  Corollary:  The  1904  assertion  by  President  Theodore
Roosevelt that the United States would act as a “policeman” in
the Caribbean region and intervene in the affairs of nations that
were  guilty  of  “wrongdoing  or  impotence”  in  order  to  protect
U.S. interests in Latin America. (p. 683)

Roosevelt recession: A recession from 1937 to 1938 that occurred

after President Roosevelt cut the federal budget. (p. 751)

Root-Takahira Agreement: A 1908 agreement between the United
States and Japan confirming principles of free oceanic commerce
and recognizing Japan’s authority over Manchuria. (p. 682)

scorched-earth campaign: A campaign in the Shenandoah Valley
of  Virginia  by  Union  general  Philip  H.  Sheridan’s  troops.  The
troops  destroyed  grain,  barns,  and  other  useful  resources  to
punish farmers who had aided Confederate raiders. (p. 468)

Second  Bank  of  the  United  States:  National  bank  with  multiple
branches  chartered  in  1816  for  twenty  years.  Intended  to  help
regulate the economy, the bank became a major issue in Andrew
Jackson’s reelection campaign in 1832. (p. 325)

Second Continental Congress: Legislative body that governed the
United  States  from  May  1775  through  the  war’s  duration.  It
established an army, created its own money, and declared inde-
pendence once all hope for a peaceful reconciliation with Britain
was gone. (p. 176)

