G-20

Glossary

Second  Great  Awakening:  Unprecedented  religious  revival  that
swept the nation between 1790 and 1850; it also proved to be a
major impetus for the reform movements of the era. (p. 271)

Second Hundred Years’ War: An era of warfare beginning with the
War  of  the  League  of  Augsburg  in  1689  and  lasting  until  the
defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815. In that time, England
fought in seven major wars; the longest era of peace lasted only
twenty-six years. (p. 88)

secret ballot: Form of voting that allows the voter to enter a choice
in privacy without having to submit a recognizable ballot or to
voice the choice out loud to others. (p. 393)

Securities and Exchange Commission: A commission established
by Congress in 1934 to regulate the stock market. The commis-
sion had broad powers to determine how stocks and bonds were
sold to the public, to set rules for margin (credit) transactions,
and  to  prevent  stock  sales  by  those  with  inside  information
about corporate plans. (p. 745)

Sedition  Act  of  1918:  Wartime  law  that  prohibited  any  words  or
behavior that might promote resistance to the United States or
help in the cause of its enemies. (p. 691)

self-made  man:  A  nineteenth-century  ideal  that  celebrated  men
who rose to wealth or social prominence from humble origins
through self-discipline, hard work, and temperate habits. (p. 304)

Seneca Falls Convention: The  first  women’s  rights  convention  in
the  United  States.  Held  in  Seneca  Falls,  New  York,  in  1848,  it
resulted  in  a  manifesto  extending  to  women  the  egalitarian
republican ideology of the Declaration of Independence. (p. 371)

sentimentalism: A way of experiencing the world that emphasized
emotions  and  a  sensuous  appreciation  of  God,  nature,  and
people. Part of the Romantic movement, it spread to the United
States from Europe in the late eighteenth century. (p. 258)

separate  sphere:  A  term  used  by  historians  to  describe  the
nineteenth-century  view  that  men  and  women  have  different
gender-defined  characteristics  and,  consequently,  that  men
should  dominate  the  public  sphere  of  politics  and  economics,
while  women  should  manage  the  private  sphere  of  home  and
family. (p. 367)

service industries: Term that includes food, beverage, and tourist
industries,  financial  and  medical  service  industries,  and  com-
puter technology industries, which were the leading sectors of
U.S. growth in the second half of the 1980s. This pattern repre-
sented  a  shift  from  reliance  on  the  heavy  industries  of  steel,
autos, and chemicals. (p. 987)

Servicemen’s  Readjustment  Act  (1944):  Popularly  known  as  the
GI Bill, legislation authorizing the government to provide World
War II veterans with funds for education, housing, and health
care, as well as loans to start businesses and buy homes. (p. 781)

sharecropping: The labor system by which landowners and impov-
erished southern farmworkers, particularly African Americans,
divided the proceeds from crops harvested on the landowner’s
property. With local merchants providing supplies — in exchange
for  a  lien  on  the  crop — sharecropping  pushed  farmers  into

cash-crop  production  and  often  trapped  them  in  long-term
debt. (p. 491)

Sharon  Statement:  Drafted  by  founding  members  of  the  Young
Americans for Freedom (YAF ), this manifesto outlined the group’s
principles  and  inspired  young  conservatives  who  would  play
important roles in the Reagan administration in the 1980s. (p. 918)

Shays’s Rebellion: A 1786–1787 uprising led by dissident farmers
in  western  Massachusetts,  many  of  them  Revolutionary  War
veterans,  protesting  the  taxation  policies  of  the  eastern  elites
who controlled the state’s government. (p. 204)

Shelley v. Kraemer: A 1948 Supreme Court decision that outlawed
restrictive  covenants  on  the  occupancy  of  housing  develop-
ments  by  African  Americans,  Asian  Americans,  and  other
minorities. Because the Court decision did not actually prohibit
racial discrimination in housing, unfair practices against minor-
ity  groups  continued  until  passage  of  the  Fair  Housing  Act  in
1968. (p. 857)

Sheppard-Towner  Federal  Maternity  and  Infancy  Act:  The  first
federally  funded  health-care  legislation  that  provided  federal
funds for medical clinics, prenatal education programs, and vis-
iting nurses. (p. 709)

Sherman Antitrust Act: Landmark 1890 act that forbade anticom-
petitive business activities, requiring the federal government to
investigate  trusts  and  any  companies  operating  in  violation  of
the act. (p. 642)

Sierra Club: An organization founded in 1892 that was dedicated
to the enjoyment and preservation of America’s great mountains
(including  the  Sierra  Nevadas)  and  wilderness  environments.
Encouraged  by  such  groups,  national  and  state  governments
began to set aside more public lands for preservation and recre-
ation. (p. 583)

silent  majority:  Term  derived  from  the  title  of  a  book  by  Ben  J.
Wattenberg  and  Richard  Scammon  (called  The  Real  Majority)
and used by Nixon in a 1969 speech to describe those who sup-
ported  his  positions  but  did  not  publicly  assert  their  voices,
in  contrast  to  those  involved  in  the  antiwar,  civil  rights,  and
women’s movements. (p. 926)

Silent Spring: Book published in 1962 by biologist Rachel Carson.
Its analysis of the pesticide DDT’s toxic impact on the human
and  natural  food  chains  galvanized  environmental  activists.
(p. 939)

Slaughter-House  Cases:  A  group  of  decisions  begun  in  1873  in
which the Court began to undercut the power of the Fourteenth
Amendment to protect African American rights. (p. 500)

slave society: A society in which the institution of slavery affects all

aspects of life. (p. 388)

“slavery follows the flag”: The assertion by John C. Calhoun that
planters  could  by  right  take  their  slave  property  into  newly
opened territories. (p. 428)

Smoot-Hawley  Tariff:  A  high  tariff  enacted  in  1930  during  the
Great Depression. By taxing imported goods, Congress hoped to
stimulate  American  manufacturing,  but  the  tariff  triggered

