retaliatory  tariffs  in  other  countries,  which  further  hindered
global trade and led to greater economic contraction. (p. 736)

Social  Darwinism:  An  idea,  actually  formulated  not  by  Charles
Darwin  but  by  British  philosopher  and  sociologist  Herbert
Spencer, that human society advanced through ruthless compe-
tition and the “survival of the fittest.” (p. 594)

Social Gospel: A movement to renew religious faith through dedi-
cation to public welfare and social justice, reforming both soci-
ety and the self through Christian service. (p. 600)

Social Security Act: A 1935 act with three main provisions: old-age
pensions for workers; a joint federal-state system of compensa-
tion  for  unemployed  workers;  and  a  program  of  payments  to
widowed mothers and the blind, deaf, and disabled. (p. 747)

social  settlement:  A  community  welfare  center  that  investigated
the  plight  of  the  urban  poor,  raised  funds  to  address  urgent
needs,  and  helped  neighborhood  residents  advocate  on  their
own behalf. Social settlements became a nationally recognized
reform strategy during the Progressive Era. (p. 627)

socialism: A system of social and economic organization based on
the common ownership of goods  or state control of the econ-
omy. (p. 351)

soft  power:  The  exercise  of  popular  cultural  influence  abroad,  as
American radio and movies became popular around the world
in  the  1920s,  transmitting  American  cultural  ideals  overseas.
(p. 726)

“Solid  South”:  The  post-Reconstruction  goal — achieved  by  the
early  twentieth  century — of  almost  complete  electoral  control
of the South by the Democratic Party. (p. 646)

Sons  of  Liberty:  Colonists — primarily  middling  merchants  and
artisans — who  banded  together  to  protest  the  Stamp  Act  and
other  imperial  reforms  of  the  1760s.  The  group  originated  in
Boston in 1765 but soon spread to all the colonies. (p. 158)

South Atlantic System: A new agricultural and commercial order
that produced sugar, tobacco, rice, and other tropical and sub-
tropical  products  for  an  international  market.  Its  plantation
societies were ruled by European planter-merchants and worked
by hundreds of thousands of enslaved Africans. (p. 90)

Southern  Christian  Leadership  Conference  (SCLC):  After  the
Montgomery Bus Boycott, Martin Luther King Jr. and other civil
rights leaders formed the SCLC in 1957 to coordinate civil rights
activity in the South. (p. 882)

Specie Circular: An executive order in 1836 that required the Trea-
sury Department to accept only gold and silver in payment for
lands in the national domain. (p. 338)

spoils system: The widespread award of public jobs to political sup-
porters after an electoral victory. In 1829, Andrew Jackson insti-
tuted the system on the national level, arguing that the rotation
of officeholders was preferable to a permanent group of bureau-
crats. (p. 318)

Sputnik: The world’s first satellite, launched by the Soviet Union in
1957.  After  its  launch,  the  United  States  funded  research  and
education to catch up in the Cold War space competition. (p. 842)

Glossary

G-21

squatter: Someone who settles on land he or she does not own or
rent.  Many  eighteenth-century  settlers  established  themselves
on land before it was surveyed and entered for sale, requesting
the first right to purchase the land when sales began. (p. 121)

squatter sovereignty: A plan promoted by Democratic candidate
Senator Lewis Cass under which Congress would allow settlers
in each territory to determine its status as free or slave. (p. 424)

stagflation: An economic term coined in the 1970s to describe the
condition in which inflation and unemployment rise at the same
time. (p. 942)

Stamp Act Congress: A congress of delegates from nine assemblies
that met in New York City in October 1765 to protest the loss of
American  “rights  and  liberties,”  especially  the  right  to  trial  by
jury. The congress challenged the constitutionality of both the
Stamp  and  Sugar  Acts  by  declaring  that  only  the  colonists’
elected representatives could tax them. (p. 158)

Stamp Act of 1765: British law imposing a tax on all paper used in
the colonies. Widespread resistance to the Stamp Act prevented
it from taking effect and led to its repeal in 1766. (p. 157)

states’ rights: An interpretation of the Constitution that exalts the
sovereignty of the states and circumscribes the authority of the
national government. (p. 324)

States’ Rights Democratic Party (Dixiecrats): A breakaway party
of white Democrats from the South, formed for the 1948 elec-
tion. Its formation shed light on an internal struggle between the
civil rights aims of the party’s  liberal wing and southern white
Democrats. (p. 875)

Stonewall Inn: A two-day riot by Stonewall Inn patrons after the
police  raided  the  gay  bar  in  New  York’s  Greenwich  Village  in
1969; the event contributed to the rapid rise of a gay liberation
movement. (p. 926)

Stono Rebellion: Slave uprising in 1739 along the Stono River in
South  Carolina  in  which  a  group  of  slaves  armed  themselves,
plundered  six  plantations,  and  killed  more  than  twenty  colo-
nists. Colonists quickly suppressed the rebellion. (p. 101)

STOP ERA: An organization founded by Phyllis Schlafly in 1972 to

fight the Equal Rights Amendment. (p. 953)

Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC): A student
civil  rights  group  founded  in  1960  under  the  mentorship  of
activist Ella Baker. SNCC initially embraced an interracial and
nonhierarchical  structure  that  encouraged  leadership  at  the
grassroots level and practiced the civil disobedience principles
of Martin Luther King Jr. As violence toward civil rights activists
escalated  nationwide  in  the  1960s,  SNCC  expelled  nonblack
members  and  promoted  “black  power”  and  the  teachings  of
Malcolm X. (p. 882)

Students  for  a  Democratic  Society  (SDS):  An  organization  for
social change founded by college students in 1960. (p. 914)

Sugar Act of 1764: British law that decreased the duty on French
molasses, making it more attractive for shippers to obey the law,
and  at  the  same  time  raised  penalties  for  smuggling.  The  act
enraged  New  England  merchants,  who  opposed  both  the  tax

