G-22

Glossary

and  the  fact  that  prosecuted  merchants  would  be  tried  by
British-appointed judges in a vice-admiralty court. (p. 155)

Sunbelt:  Name  applied  to  the  Southwest  and  South,  which  grew
rapidly after World War II as a center of defense industries and
nonunionized labor. (p. 862)

supply-side economics (Reaganomics): Economic theory that tax
cuts  for  individuals  and  businesses  encourage  investment  and
production  (supply)  and  stimulate  consumption  (demand)
because individuals can keep more of their earnings. In reality,
supply-side economics created a massive federal budget deficit.
(p. 982)

Taft-Hartley Act: Law passed by the Republican-controlled Con-
gress in 1947 that overhauled the 1935 National Labor Relations
Act, placing restrictions on organized labor that made it more
difficult for unions to organize workers. (p. 819)

talented  tenth:  A  term  used  by  Harvard-educated  sociologist
W.  E.  B.  Du  Bois  for  the  top  10  percent  of  educated  African
Americans,  whom  he  called  on  to  develop  new  strategies  to
advocate for civil rights. (p. 655)

Tariff of Abominations: A tariff enacted in 1828 that raised duties
significantly  on  raw  materials,  textiles,  and  iron  goods.  New
York senator Van Buren hoped to win the support of farmers in
New York, Ohio, and Kentucky with the tariff, but it enraged the
South, which had no industries that needed tariff protection and
resented the higher cost of imported dutied goods. (p. 320)

task system: A system of labor common in the rice-growing regions
of South Carolina in which a slave was assigned a daily task to
complete and allowed to do as he wished upon its completion.
(p. 397)

tax  revolt:  A  movement  to  lower  or  eliminate  taxes.  California’s
Proposition 13, which rolled back property taxes, capped future
increases for present owners, and required that all tax measures
have  a  two-thirds  majority  in  the  legislature,  was  the  result  of
one such revolt, inspiring similar movements across the country.
(p. 946)

Tea Act of May 1773: British act that lowered the existing tax on tea
and granted exemptions to the East India Company to make their
tea cheaper in the colonies and entice boycotting Americans to
buy it. Resistance to the Tea Act led to the passage of the Coercive
Acts and imposition of military rule in Massachusetts. (p. 168)

Tea Party: A set of far-right opposition groups that emerged during
President Obama’s first term and gave voice to the extreme indi-
vidualism  and  antigovernment  sentiment  traditionally  associ-
ated with right-wing movements in the United States. (p. 1031)

Teapot  Dome:  Nickname  for  scandal  in  which  Interior  Secretary
Albert Fall accepted $300,000 in bribes for leasing oil reserves
on public land in Teapot Dome, Wyoming. It was part of a larger
pattern  of  corruption  that  marred  Warren  G.  Harding’s  presi-
dency. (p. 710)

teenager:  A  term  for  a  young  adult.  American  youth  culture,
focused on the spending power of the “teenager,” emerged as a
cultural phenomenon in the postwar decades. (p. 847)

Teller Amendment: An amendment to the 1898 U.S. declaration of
war against Spain disclaiming any intention by the United States
to  occupy  Cuba.  The  amendment  assured  the  public  that  the
United  States  would  uphold  democracy  abroad  as  well  as  at
home. (p. 675)

Ten Percent Plan: A plan proposed by President Abraham Lincoln
during the Civil War, but never implemented, that would have
granted  amnesty  to  most  ex-Confederates  and  allowed  each
rebellious state to return to the Union as soon as 10 percent of its
voters had taken a loyalty oath and the state had approved the
Thirteenth Amendment. (p. 480)

tenancy:  The  rental  of  property.  To  attract  tenants  in  New  York’s
Hudson River Valley, Dutch and English manorial lords granted
long tenancy leases, with the right to sell improvements — houses
and barns, for example — to the next tenant. (p. 116)

tenement:  A  high-density,  cheap,  five-  or  six-story  housing  unit
designed for working-class urban populations. In the late nine-
teenth and early twentieth centuries, tenements became a sym-
bol of urban immigrant poverty. (p. 614)

Tennessee  Valley  Authority:  An  agency  funded  by  Congress  in
1933 that integrated flood control, reforestation, electricity gen-
eration, and agricultural and industrial development in the Ten-
nessee Valley area. (p. 760)

Tet  offensive:  Major  campaign  of  attacks  launched  throughout
South Vietnam in January 1968 by the North Vietnamese and
Vietcong.  A  major  turning  point  in  the  war,  it  exposed  the
credibility  gap  between  official  statements  and  the  war’s  real-
ity,  and  it  shook  Americans’  confidence  in  the  government.
(p. 919)

Three Mile Island: A nuclear plant near Harrisburg, Pennsylvania,
where a reactor core came close to a meltdown in March 1979.
After the incident at Three Mile Island, no new nuclear plants
were  authorized  in  the  United  States,  though  a  handful  with
existing authorization were built in the 1980s. (p. 942)

Title IX: A law passed by Congress in 1972 that broadened the 1964
Civil Rights Act to include educational institutions, prohibiting
colleges  and  universities  that  received  federal  funds  from  dis-
criminating on the basis of sex. By requiring comparable fund-
ing for sports programs, Title IX made women’s athletics a real
presence on college campuses. (p. 925)

“To  Secure  These  Rights”:  The  1947  report  by  the  Presidential
Committee on Civil Rights that called for robust federal action
to  ensure  equality  for  African  Americans.  President  Truman
asked Congress to make all of the report’s recommendations —
including the abolition of poll taxes and the restoration of the
Fair Employment Practices Commission — into law, leading to
discord in the Democratic Party. (p. 875)

toleration: The allowance of different religious practices. Lord Bal-
timore  persuaded  the  Maryland  assembly  to  enact  the  Tolera-
tion Act (1649), which granted all Christians the right to follow
their beliefs and hold church services. The crown imposed tol-
eration on Massachusetts Bay in its new royal charter of 1691.
(p. 62)

