total  war:  A  form  of  warfare  that  mobilizes  all  of  a  society’s
resources — economic,  political,  and  cultural — in  support  of
the military effort. (p. 452)

town meeting: A system of local government in New England in
which all male heads of households met regularly to elect select-
men, levy local taxes, and regulate markets, roads, and schools.
(p. 64)

Townsend  Plan:  A  plan  proposed  by  Francis  Townsend  in  1933
that would give $200 a month (about $3,300 today) to citizens
over  the  age  of  sixty.  Townsend  Clubs  sprang  up  across  the
country in support of the plan, mobilizing mass support for old-
age pensions. (p. 747)

Townshend  Act  of  1767:  British  law  that  established  new  duties
on tea, glass, lead, paper, and painters’ colors imported into the
colonies. The Townshend duties led to boycotts and heightened
tensions between Britain and the American colonies. (p. 161)

Trail of Tears: Forced westward journey of Cherokees from their
lands  in  Georgia  to  present-day  Oklahoma  in  1838.  Nearly  a
quarter of the Cherokees died en route. (p. 331)

transcendentalism:  A  nineteenth-century  intellectual  movement
that  posited  the  importance  of  an  ideal  world  of  mystical
knowledge  and  harmony  beyond  the  immediate  grasp  of  the
senses.  Transcendentalists  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  and  Henry
David  Thoreau  called  for  the  critical  examination  of  society
and emphasized individuality, self-reliance, and nonconformity.
(p. 346)

transcontinental railroad: The railway line completed on May 10,
1869, that connected the Central Pacific and Union Pacific lines,
enabling  goods  to  move  by  railway  from  the  eastern  United
States all the way to California. (p. 508)

trans-Saharan trade: The primary avenue of trade for West Afri-
cans  before  European  traders  connected  them  to  the  Atlantic
World.  Controlled  in  turn  by  the  Ghana,  Mali,  and  Songhai
empires, it carried slaves and gold to North Africa in exchange
for salt and other goods. (p. 23)

Treaty  of  Ghent:  The  treaty  signed  on  Christmas  Eve  1814  that
ended  the  War  of  1812.  It  retained  the  prewar  borders  of  the
United States. (p. 241)

Treaty of Greenville: A 1795 treaty between the United States and
various  Indian  tribes  in  Ohio.  American  negotiators  acknowl-
edged Indian ownership of the land, and, in return for various
payments, the Western Confederacy ceded most of Ohio to the
United States. (p. 226)

Treaty of Kanagawa: An 1854 treaty that, in the wake of a show of
military  force  by  U.S.  Commodore  Matthew  Perry,  allowed
American ships to refuel at two ports in Japan. (p. 510)

Treaty of Paris of 1783: The treaty that ended the Revolutionary
War. In the treaty, Great Britain formally recognized American
independence and relinquished its claims to lands south of the
Great Lakes and east of the Mississippi River. (p. 196)

Treaty of Versailles: The 1919 treaty that ended World War I. The
agreement  redrew  the  map  of  the  world,  assigned  Germany

Glossary

G-23

sole  responsibility  for  the  war,  and  saddled  it  with  a  debt  of
$33  billion  in  war  damages.  Its  long-term  impact  around  the
globe —  including  the  creation  of  British  and  French  imperial
“mandates” — was catastrophic. (p. 697)

Triangle  Shirtwaist  Fire:  A  devastating  fire  that  quickly  spread
through the Triangle Shirtwaist Company in New York City on
March 25, 1911, killing 146 people. In the wake of the tragedy,
fifty-six state laws were passed dealing with such issues as fire
hazards,  unsafe  machines,  and  wages  and  working  hours  for
women and children. The fire also provided a national impetus
for industrial reform. (p. 629)

tribalization:  The  adaptation  of  stateless  peoples  to  the  demands

imposed on them by neighboring states. (p. 88)

tribute: The practice of collecting goods from conquered peoples.
The  Aztecs  and  Incas  relied  on  systems  of  tribute  before  they
were  conquered  by  Spain;  after  the  conquest,  Spanish  officials
adapted indigenous tribute systems to their own needs by bind-
ing Indian labor to powerful men through the encomienda and
mita systems. (p. 8)

Truman  Doctrine:  President  Harry  S.  Truman’s  commitment  to
“support  free  peoples  who  are  resisting  attempted  subjugation
by  armed  minorities  or  by  outside  pressures.”  First  applied
to  Greece  and  Turkey  in  1947,  it  became  the  justification  for
U.S.  intervention  into  several  countries  during  the  Cold  War.
(p. 809)

trust: A small group of associates that hold stock from a group of
combined firms, managing them as a single entity. Trusts quickly
evolved  into  other  centralized  business  forms,  but  progressive
critics continued to refer to giant firms like United States Steel
and Standard Oil as “trusts.” (p. 548)

U.S. Fisheries Commission: A federal bureau established in 1871
that made recommendations to stem the decline in wild fish. Its
creation was an important step toward wildlife conservation and
management. (p. 525)

U.S. v. Cruikshank: A decision in which the Supreme Court ruled
that voting rights remained a state matter unless the state itself
violated  those  rights.  If  former  slaves’  rights  were  violated  by
individuals or private groups, that lay beyond federal jurisdic-
tion.  Like  the  Slaughter-House  Cases,  the  ruling  undercut  the
power of the Fourteenth Amendment to protect African Ameri-
can rights. (p. 500)

“unchurched”: Irreligious Americans, who probably constituted a
majority of the population in 1800. Evangelical Methodist and
Baptist churches were by far the most successful institutions in
attracting new members from the unchurched. (p. 270)

Underground Railroad: An informal network of whites and free
blacks in the South that assisted fugitive slaves to reach freedom
in the North. (p. 362)

Union League: A secret fraternal order in which black and white
Republicans joined forces in the late 1860s. The League became
a powerful political association that spread through the former
Confederacy,  pressuring  Congress  to  uphold  justice  for  freed-
men. (p. 493)

