G-24

Glossary

unions: Organizations of workers that began during the Industrial
Revolution to bargain with employers over wages, hours, bene-
fits, and control of the workplace. (p. 291)

United Farm Workers (UFW): A union of farmworkers founded in
1962  by  Cesar  Chavez  and  Dolores  Huerta  that  sought  to
empower the mostly Mexican American migrant farmworkers
who faced discrimination and exploitative conditions, especially
in the Southwest. (p. 897)

United  Nations:  An  international  body  agreed  upon  at  the  Yalta
Conference,  and  founded  at  a  conference  in  San  Francisco  in
1945, consisting of a General Assembly, in which all nations are
represented,  and  a  Security  Council  of  the  five  major  Allied
powers — the  United  States,  Britain,  France,  China,  and  the
Soviet  Union — and  seven  other  nations  elected  on  a  rotating
basis. (p. 807)

Universal  Negro  Improvement  Association:  A  Harlem-based
group, led by charismatic, Jamaican-born Marcus Garvey, that
arose in the 1920s to mobilize African American workers and
champion black separatism. (p. 719)

USA  PATRIOT  Act:  A  2001  law  that  gave  the  government  new
powers  to  monitor  suspected  terrorists  and  their  associates,
including the ability to access personal information. (p. 1028)

utopias: Communities founded by reformers and transcendental-
ists  to  help  realize  their  spiritual  and  moral  potential  and  to
escape  from  the  competition  of  modern  industrial  society.
(p. 349)

Valley Forge: A military camp in which George Washington’s army
of 12,000 soldiers and hundreds of camp followers suffered hor-
ribly in the winter of 1777–1778. (p. 189)

vaudeville:  A  professional  stage  show  popular  in  the  1880s  and
1890s  that  included  singing,  dancing,  and  comedy  routines;  it
created a form of family entertainment for the urban masses that
deeply influenced later forms, such as radio shows and television
sitcoms. (p. 615)

vertical integration: A business model in which a corporation con-
trolled all aspects of production from raw materials to packaged
products. “Robber barons” or industrial innovators such as Gus-
tavus Swift and Andrew Carnegie pioneered this business form
at the end of the Civil War. (p. 547)

Veterans Administration: A federal agency that assists former sol-
diers. Following World War II, the VA helped veterans purchase
new homes with no down payment, sparking a building boom
that created jobs in the construction industry and fueling con-
sumer spending in home appliances and automobiles. (p. 843)

vice-admiralty court: A maritime tribunal presided over by a roy-

ally appointed judge, with no jury. (p. 156)

Vietnamization: A new U.S. policy, devised under President Nixon
in the early 1970s, of delegating the ground fighting to the South
Vietnamese in the Vietnam War. American troop levels dropped
and American casualties dropped correspondingly, but the kill-
ing in Vietnam continued. (p. 927)

Virginia  and  Kentucky  Resolutions:  Resolutions  of  1798  con-
demning the Alien and Sedition Acts that were submitted to the

federal government by the Virginia and Kentucky state legisla-
tures. The resolutions tested the idea that state legislatures could
judge  the  constitutionality  of  federal  laws  and  nullify  them.
(p. 225)

Virginia Plan: A plan drafted by James Madison that was presented
at  the  Philadelphia  Constitutional  Convention.  It  designed  a
powerful three-branch government, with representation in both
houses of the congress tied to population; this plan would have
eclipsed  the  voice  of  small  states  in  the  national  government.
(p. 205)

virtual representation: The claim made by British politicians that
the interests of the American colonists were adequately repre-
sented in Parliament by merchants who traded with the colonies
and by absentee landlords (mostly sugar planters) who owned
estates in the West Indies. (p. 157)

voluntarism: The funding of churches by their members. It allowed
the laity to control the clergy, while also supporting the republi-
can principle of self-government. (p. 270)

Voting Rights Act of 1965: Law passed during Lyndon Johnson’s
administration  that  empowered  the  federal  government  to
intervene  to  ensure  minorities’  access  to  the  voting  booth.
(p. 891)

Wade-Davis  Bill:  A  bill  proposed  by  Congress  in  July  1864  that
required an oath of allegiance by a majority of each state’s adult
white  men,  new  governments  formed  only  by  those  who  had
never taken up arms against the Union, and permanent disen-
franchisement of Confederate leaders. The plan was passed but
pocket vetoed by President Abraham Lincoln. (p. 480)

Wagner Act: A 1935 act that upheld the right of industrial workers
to  join  unions  and  established  the  National  Labor  Relations
Board  (NLRB),  a  federal  agency  with  the  authority  to  protect
workers  from  employer  coercion  and  to  guarantee  collective
bargaining. (p. 747)

Waltham-Lowell System:  A  system  of  labor  using  young  women
recruited  from  farm  families  to  work  in  factories  in  Lowell,
Chicopee,  and  other  sites  in  Massachusetts  and  New  Hamp-
shire. The women lived in company boardinghouses with strict
rules  and  curfews  and  were  often  required  to  attend  church.
(p. 288)

War and Peace Democrats: Members of the Democratic Party that
split into two camps over war policy during the Civil War. War
Democrats vowed to continue fighting until the rebellion ended,
while Peace Democrats called for a constitutional convention to
negotiate a peace settlement. (p. 469)

War Industries Board: A federal board established in July 1917 to
direct  military  production,  including  allocation  of  resources,
conversion of factories to war production, and setting of prices.
(p. 688)

War  Powers  Act  (1941):  The  law  that  gave  President  Roosevelt
unprecedented control over all aspects of the war effort during
World War II. (p. 773)

War Powers Act (1973): A law that limited the president’s ability to
deploy  U.S.  forces  without  congressional  approval.  Congress

