passed the War Powers Act in 1973 as a series of laws to fight the
abuses of the Nixon administration. (p. 948)

Warren Court: The Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren
(1953–1969),  which  expanded  the  Constitution’s  promise  of
equality  and  civil  rights.  It  issued  landmark  decisions  in  the
areas of civil rights, criminal rights, reproductive freedom, and
separation of church and state. (p. 930)

Warsaw Pact: A military alliance established in Eastern Europe in
1955  to  counter  the  NATO  alliance;  it  included  Albania,  Bul-
garia, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Roma-
nia, and the Soviet Union. (p. 812)

Watergate:  Term  referring  to  the  1972  break-in  at  Democratic
Party  headquarters  in  the  Watergate  complex  in  Washington,
D.C.,  by  men  working  for  President  Nixon’s  reelection  cam-
paign, along with Nixon’s efforts to cover it up. The Watergate
scandal led to President Nixon’s resignation. (p. 947)

“waving the bloody shirt”: A term of ridicule used in the 1880s and
1890s  to  refer  to  politicians — especially  Republicans — who,
according to critics, whipped up old animosities from the Civil
War era that ought to be set aside. (p. 638)

Webster v. Reproductive Health Services: 1989 Supreme Court rul-
ing that upheld the authority of state governments to limit the
use of public funds and facilities for abortions. (p. 1020)

welfare capitalism: A system of labor relations that stressed man-
agement’s responsibility for employees’ well-being. (p. 708)

welfare state: A term applied to industrial democracies that adopt
various  government-guaranteed  social-welfare  programs.  The
creation  of  Social  Security  and  other  measures  of  the  Second
New Deal fundamentally changed American society and estab-
lished a national welfare state for the first time. (p. 747)

Whigs:  The  second  national  party,  the  Whig  Party  arose  in  1834
when  a  group  of  congressmen  contested  Andrew  Jackson’s
policies  and  conduct.  The  party  identified  itself  with  the  pre-
Revolutionary  American  and  British  parties — also  called
Whigs —  that had opposed the arbitrary actions of British mon-
archs. (p. 332)

Whiskey Rebellion: A 1794 uprising by farmers in western Penn-
sylvania in response to enforcement of an unpopular excise tax
on whiskey. (p. 219)

Williams  v.  Mississippi:  An  1898  Supreme  Court  ruling  that
allowed states to impose poll taxes and literacy tests. By 1908,
every southern state had adopted such measures. (p. 645)

Wilmot  Proviso:  The  1846  proposal  by  Representative  David
Wilmot  of  Pennsylvania  to  ban  slavery  in  territory  acquired
from the Mexican War. (p. 421)

Wisconsin  Idea:  A  policy  promoted  by  Republican  governor
Robert  La  Follette  of  Wisconsin  for greater  government  inter-
vention  in  the  economy,  with  reliance  on  experts,  particularly
progressive economists, for policy recommendations. (p. 652)

Woman’s Christian Temperance Union: An organization advocat-
ing the prohibition of liquor that spread rapidly after 1879, when
charismatic  Frances  Willard  became  its  leader.  Advocating
suffrage  and  a  host  of  reform  activities,  it  launched  tens  of

Glossary

G-25

thousands of women into public life and was the first nationwide
organization  to  identify  and  condemn  domestic  violence.
(p. 589)

Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom: An orga-
nization  founded  by  women  activists  in  1919;  its  members
denounced imperialism, stressed the human suffering caused by
militarism, and proposed social justice measures. (p. 710)

women’s  liberation:  A  new  brand  of  feminism  in  the  1960s  that
attracted  primarily  younger,  college-educated  women  fresh
from  the  New  Left,  antiwar,  and  civil  rights  movements  who
sought  to  end  to  the  denigration  and  exploitation  of  women.
(p. 924)

Women’s  Trade  Union  League:  A  labor  organization  for  women
founded in New York in 1903 that brought elite, middle-class,
and  working-class  women  together  as  allies.  The  WTUL  sup-
ported  union  organizing  efforts  among  garment  workers.
(p. 629)

Works  Progress  Administration:  Federal  New  Deal  program
established  in  1935  that  provided  government-funded  public
works  jobs  to  millions  of  unemployed  Americans  during  the
Great Depression in areas ranging from construction to the arts.
(p. 749)

World Bank: An international bank created to provide loans for the
reconstruction  of  war-torn  Europe  as  well  as  for  the  develop-
ment  of  former  colonized  nations  in  the  developing  world.
(p. 840)

World Trade Organization (WTO): International economic body
established in 1995 through the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade to enforce substantial tariff and import quota reduc-
tions. (p. 1004)

World Wide Web: A collection of interlinked computer servers that
debuted in 1991, allowing access by millions to documents, pic-
tures, and other materials. (p. 1012)

Wounded Knee: The 1890 massacre of Sioux Indians by American
cavalry at Wounded Knee Creek, South Dakota. Sent to suppress
the  Ghost  Dance,  soldiers  caught  up  with  fleeing  Lakotas  and
killed as many as 300. (p. 534)

XYZ  Affair:  A  1797  incident  in  which  American  negotiators  in
France were rebuffed for refusing to pay a substantial bribe. The
incident led the United States into an undeclared war that cur-
tailed American trade with the French West Indies. (p. 223)

Yalta Conference: A meeting in Yalta of President Roosevelt, Prime
Minister  Churchill,  and  Joseph  Stalin  in  February  1945,  in
which the leaders discussed the treatment of Germany, the sta-
tus of Poland, the creation of the United Nations, and Russian
entry into the war against Japan. (p. 806)

yellow journalism: A derogatory term for newspapers that special-
ize in sensationalistic reporting. Yellow journalism is associated
with  the  inflammatory  reporting  by  the  Hearst  and  Pulitzer
newspapers leading up to the Spanish-American War in 1898.
(p. 619)

Yellowstone National Park: Established in 1872 by Congress, Yel-
lowstone was the United States’s first national park. (p. 525)

