F O R   T H E   A P ®

C O U R S E

EIGHTH EDITION

A

M

E

R

I

C

A

’

S

H

I

S

T

O

R

Y

Henretta | Hinderaker

Edwards | Self

America’s History will help you understand themes, make
connections, and think historically.

•  Build historical thinking skills. See the “Historical Thinking, Reading, and Writing
Skills for AP U.S. History” section for the skills you need to succeed in this course. In
every chapter, you’ll find “Thinking Like a Historian” pages that will prepare you for the
rigor of the exam’s Document-Based Questions (DBQs). Marginal review questions ask
you to identify causes, explain consequences, trace change over time, and practice other
historical thinking skills.

•  Understand AP themes and learning objectives. A variety of features, including

“Big Idea” questions at the start of each chapter, support the exam’s emphasis on thematic
learning objectives. Unique Thematic Timelines organized by AP themes and “Thematic
Understanding” questions make connections across chapters and prompt you to recog-
nize continuities and change over time.

•  Make connections across time periods. Like the AP U.S. History course, America’s
History is organized into nine time periods. In addition, “Making Connections” and “Key
Turning Points” questions in every chapter will encourage you to consider broader
historical developments and periodization.

“America’s History is a book that focuses on having students understand
the big picture, rather than on having them memorize minute details. This is the
direction the redesigned course is taking.”

—Geri Hastings, Catonsville High School, MD

PRINT + DIGITAL = SOLVED

Part of your book is online, where games and activities with immediate feedback are
possible. An access card comes with this book. Look for this icon throughout the
book to get to the online content:

LearningCurve Be smart: get ready for class and tests by using the game-like
online quizzing of LearningCurve to discover what you know and learn what you don’t.

GET HELP
Strive for a 5: Preparing for the AP® U.S. History Examination
This study and prep guide offers two full-length practice exams and a review of
course material keyed to the textbook. You can learn more about this product at
highschool.bfwpub.com/henretta8e.

Teachers: We crafted this book to address the requirements of the redesigned course. We offer
unmatched support to help you and your students prepare for the new exam. To learn more about
our teacher resources, supplements, and packages, please contact your local Bedford, Freeman
& Worth sales representative or visit highschool.bfwpub.com/henretta8e.

highschool.bfwpub.com

AP® is a trademark registered by the College
Board, which was not involved in the production
of, and does not endorse, this product.

with

INTEGRATED

MEDIA

E

S

R

U

O

C

®

P

A

E

H

T

R

O

F

AMERICA’S HISTORY

E I G H T H   E D I T I O N

Henret ta   Hinderaker   Edwards   Self

AP® is a trademark registered by the College Board, which was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse, this product.

